Chapter Eight

ELECTROMAGNETIC
WAVES

8.1 INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 4, we learnt that an electric current produces magnetic field
and that two current-carrying wires exert a magnetic force on each other.
Further, in Chapter 6, we have seen that a magnetic field changing with
time gives rise to an electric field. Is the converse also true? Does an
electric field changing with time give rise to a magnetic field? James Clerk
Maxwell (1831-1879), argued that this was indeed the case – not only
an electric current but also a time-varying electric field generates magnetic
field. While applying the Ampere’s circuital law to find magnetic field at a
point outside a capacitor connected to a time-varying current, Maxwell
noticed an inconsistency in the Ampere’s circuital law. He suggested the
existence of an additional current, called by him, the displacement
current to remove this inconsistency.
Maxwell formulated a set of equations involving electric and magnetic
fields, and their sources, the charge and current densities. These
equations are known as Maxwell’s equations. Together with the Lorentz
force formula (Chapter 4), they mathematically express all the basic laws
of electromagnetism.
The most important prediction to emerge from Maxwell’s equations
is the existence of electromagnetic waves, which are (coupled) timevarying electric and magnetic fields that propagate in space. The speed
of the waves, according to these equations, turned out to be very close to

JAMES CLERK MAXWELL (1831–1879)

Physics

270

James Clerk Maxwell
(1831 – 1879) Born in
Edinburgh, Scotland,
was among the greatest
physicists
of
the
nineteenth century. He
derived the thermal
velocity distribution of
molecules in a gas and
was among the first to
obtain
reliable
estimates of molecular
parameters
from
measurable quantities
like viscosity, etc.
Maxwell’s
greatest
acheivement was the
unification of the laws of
electricity
and
magnetism (discovered
by Coulomb, Oersted,
Ampere and Faraday)
into a consistent set of
equations now called
Maxwell’s equations.
From these he arrived at
the most important
conclusion that light is
an
electromagnetic
wave. Interestingly,
Maxwell did not agree
with the idea (strongly
suggested
by
the
Faraday’s
laws
of
electrolysis)
that
electricity
was
particulate in nature.

the speed of light( 3 ×108 m/s), obtained from optical
measurements. This led to the remarkable conclusion
that light is an electromagnetic wave. Maxwell’s work
thus unified the domain of electricity, magnetism and
light. Hertz, in 1885, experimentally demonstrated the
existence of electromagnetic waves. Its technological use
by Marconi and others led in due course to the
revolution in communication that we are witnessing
today.
In this chapter, we first discuss the need for
displacement current and its consequences. Then we
present a descriptive account of electromagnetic waves.
The broad spectrum of electromagnetic waves,
stretching from γ rays (wavelength ~10–12 m) to long
radio waves (wavelength ~106 m) is described. How the
electromagnetic waves are sent and received for
communication is discussed in Chapter 15.

8.2 DISPLACEMENT CURRENT
We have seen in Chapter 4 that an electrical current
produces a magnetic field around it. Maxwell showed
that for logical consistency, a changing electric field must
also produce a magnetic field. This effect is of great
importance because it explains the existence of radio
waves, gamma rays and visible light, as well as all other
forms of electromagnetic waves.
To see how a changing electric field gives rise to
a magnetic field, let us consider the process of
charging of a capacitor and apply Ampere’s circuital
law given by (Chapter 4)

“B.dl = μ0 i (t )

(8.1)

to find magnetic field at a point outside the capacitor.
Figure 8.1(a) shows a parallel plate capacitor C which
is a part of circuit through which a time-dependent
current i (t ) flows . Let us find the magnetic field at a
point such as P, in a region outside the parallel plate
capacitor. For this, we consider a plane circular loop of
radius r whose plane is perpendicular to the direction
of the current-carrying wire, and which is centred
symmetrically with respect to the wire [Fig. 8.1(a)]. From
symmetry, the magnetic field is directed along the
circumference of the circular loop and is the same in
magnitude at all points on the loop so that if B is the
magnitude of the field, the left side of Eq. (8.1) is B (2π r).
So we have
B (2πr) = μ0i (t )

(8 .2)

Electromagnetic
Waves
Now, consider a different surface, which has the same boundary. This
is a pot like surface [Fig. 8.1(b)] which nowhere touches the current, but
has its bottom between the capacitor plates; its mouth is the circular
loop mentioned above. Another such surface is shaped like a tiffin box
(without the lid) [Fig. 8.1(c)]. On applying Ampere’s circuital law to such
surfaces with the same perimeter, we find that the left hand side of
Eq. (8.1) has not changed but the right hand side is zero and not μ0 i,
since no current passes through the surface of Fig. 8.1(b) and (c). So we
have a contradiction; calculated one way, there is a magnetic field at a
point P; calculated another way, the magnetic field at P is zero.
Since the contradiction arises from our use of Ampere’s circuital law,
this law must be missing something. The missing term must be such
that one gets the same magnetic field at point P, no matter what surface
is used.
We can actually guess the missing term by looking carefully at
Fig. 8.1(c). Is there anything passing through the surface S between the
plates of the capacitor? Yes, of course, the electric field! If the plates of the
capacitor have an area A, and a total charge Q, the magnitude of the
electric field E between the plates is (Q/A)/ε0 (see Eq. 2.41). The field is
perpendicular to the surface S of Fig. 8.1(c). It has the same magnitude
over the area A of the capacitor plates, and vanishes outside it. So what
is the electric flux ΦE through the surface S ? Using Gauss’s law, it is

ΦE = E A =

1 Q
Q
A=
ε0 A
ε0

(8.3)

Now if the charge Q on the capacitor plates changes with time, there is a
current i = (dQ/dt), so that using Eq. (8.3), we have
dΦE
d ⎛ Q ⎞ 1 dQ
=
=
dt
dt ⎜⎝ ε 0 ⎟⎠ ε 0 dt

This implies that for consistency,
⎛ dΦE ⎞
=i
(8.4)
⎝ dt ⎟⎠
This is the missing term in Ampere’s circuital law. If we generalise
this law by adding to the total current carried by conductors through
the surface, another term which is ε0 times the rate of change of electric
flux through the same surface, the total has the same value of current i
for all surfaces. If this is done, there is no contradiction in the value of B
obtained anywhere using the generalised Ampere’s law. B at the point P
is non-zero no matter which surface is used for calculating it. B at a
point P outside the plates [Fig. 8.1(a)] is the same as at a point M just
inside, as it should be. The current carried by conductors due to flow of
charges is called conduction current. The current, given by Eq. (8.4), is a
new term, and is due to changing electric field (or electric displacement,
an old term still used sometimes). It is, therefore, called displacement
current or Maxwell’s displacement current. Figure 8.2 shows the electric
and magnetic fields inside the parallel plate capacitor discussed above.
The generalisation made by Maxwell then is the following. The source
of a magnetic field is not just the conduction electric current due to flowing

ε0 ⎜

FIGURE 8.1 A
parallel plate
capacitor C, as part of
a circuit through
which a time
dependent current
i (t) flows, (a) a loop of
radius r, to determine
magnetic field at a
point P on the loop;
(b) a pot-shaped
surface passing
through the interior
between the capacitor
plates with the loop
shown in (a) as its
rim; (c) a tiffinshaped surface with
the circular loop as
its rim and a flat
circular bottom S
between the capacitor
plates. The arrows
show uniform electric
field between the
capacitor plates.

271

Physics
charges, but also the time rate of change of electric field. More
precisely, the total current i is the sum of the conduction current
denoted by ic, and the displacement current denoted by id (= ε0 (dΦE/
dt)). So we have
dΦE
(8.5)
dt
In explicit terms, this means that outside the capacitor plates,
we have only conduction current ic = i, and no displacement
current, i.e., id = 0. On the other hand, inside the capacitor, there is
no conduction current, i.e., ic = 0, and there is only displacement
current, so that id = i.
The generalised (and correct) Ampere’s circuital law has the same
form as Eq. (8.1), with one difference: “the total current passing
through any surface of which the closed loop is the perimeter” is
the sum of the conduction current and the displacement current.
The generalised law is
i = ie + id = ic + ε0

dΦE
(8.6)
dt
and is known as Ampere-Maxwell law.
In all respects, the displacement current has the same physical
effects as the conduction current. In some cases, for example, steady
electric fields in a conducting wire, the displacement current may
be zero since the electric field E does not change with time. In other
FIGURE 8.2 (a) The
cases, for example, the charging capacitor above, both conduction
electric and magnetic
and displacement currents may be present in different regions of
fields E and B between
space. In most of the cases, they both may be present in the same
the capacitor plates, at
region of space, as there exist no perfectly conducting or perfectly
the point M. (b) A cross
insulating medium. Most interestingly, there may be large regions
sectional view of Fig. (a).
of space where there is no conduction current, but there is only a
displacement current due to time-varying electric fields. In such a
region, we expect a magnetic field, though there is no (conduction)
current source nearby! The prediction of such a displacement current
can be verified experimentally. For example, a magnetic field (say at point
M) between the plates of the capacitor in Fig. 8.2(a) can be measured and
is seen to be the same as that just outside (at P).
The displacement current has (literally) far reaching consequences.
One thing we immediately notice is that the laws of electricity and
magnetism are now more symmetrical*. Faraday’s law of induction states
that there is an induced emf equal to the rate of change of magnetic flux.
Now, since the emf between two points 1 and 2 is the work done per unit
charge in taking it from 1 to 2, the existence of an emf implies the existence
of an electric field. So, we can rephrase Faraday’s law of electromagnetic
induction by saying that a magnetic field, changing with time, gives rise
to an electric field. Then, the fact that an electric field changing with
time gives rise to a magnetic field, is the symmetrical counterpart, and is

∫ Bidl = μ0 i c + μ0

272

ε0

* They are still not perfectly symmetrical; there are no known sources of magnetic
field (magnetic monopoles) analogous to electric charges which are sources of
electric field.

Electromagnetic
Waves
a consequence of the displacement current being a source of a magnetic
field. Thus, time- dependent electric and magnetic fields give rise to each
other! Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction and Ampere-Maxwell
law give a quantitative expression of this statement, with the current
being the total current, as in Eq. (8.5). One very important consequence
of this symmetry is the existence of electromagnetic waves, which we
discuss qualitatively in the next section.

MAXWELL’S

EQUATIONS

1.

∫ E idA = Q / ε0

(Gauss’s Law for electricity)

2.

∫ BidA = 0

(Gauss’s Law for magnetism)

3.

∫ E idl =

4.

∫ Bidl = μ0 i c + μ0

–dΦB
dt

(Faraday’s Law)

ε0

dΦE
dt

(Ampere – Maxwell Law)

Example 8.1 A parallel plate capacitor with circular plates of radius
1 m has a capacitance of 1 nF. At t = 0, it is connected for charging in
series with a resistor R = 1 M Ω across a 2V battery (Fig. 8.3). Calculate
the magnetic field at a point P, halfway between the centre and the
periphery of the plates, after t = 10–3 s. (The charge on the capacitor
at time t is q (t) = CV [1 – exp (–t/τ )], where the time constant τ is
equal to CR.)

FIGURE 8.3

E=

q (t )
q
2
2
=
ε 0 A πε 0 ; A = π (1) m = area of the plates.

Consider now a circular loop of radius (1/2) m parallel to the plates
passing through P. The magnetic field B at all points on the loop is

E XAMPLE 8.1

Solution The time constant of the CR circuit is τ = CR = 10–3 s. Then,
we have
q(t) = CV [1 – exp (–t/τ)]
= 2 × 10–9 [1– exp (–t/10–3)]
The electric field in between the plates at time t is

273

Physics
along the loop and of the same value.
The flux ΦE through this loop is
ΦE = E × area of the loop
2

πE
q
⎛ 1⎞
=
= E × π × ⎜⎝ ⎟⎠ =
2
4
4ε 0

EXAMPLE 8.1

The displacement current
dΦE
1 dq
=
= 0.5 × 10 –6 exp ( –1)
4 dt
dt
at t = 10–3s. Now, applying Ampere-Maxwell law to the loop, we get
id = ε0

⎛ 1⎞
B × 2π × ⎜ ⎟ = μ0 (i c + i d ) = μ0 ( 0 + i d ) = 0.5×10–6 μ exp(–1)
0
⎝ 2⎠

or, B = 0.74 × 10–13 T

8.3 ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
8.3.1 Sources of electromagnetic waves

274

How are electromagnetic waves produced? Neither stationary charges
nor charges in uniform motion (steady currents) can be sources of
electromagnetic waves. The former produces only electrostatic fields, while
the latter produces magnetic fields that, however, do not vary with time.
It is an important result of Maxwell’s theory that accelerated charges
radiate electromagnetic waves. The proof of this basic result is beyond
the scope of this book, but we can accept it on the basis of rough,
qualitative reasoning. Consider a charge oscillating with some frequency.
(An oscillating charge is an example of accelerating charge.) This
produces an oscillating electric field in space, which produces an oscillating
magnetic field, which in turn, is a source of oscillating electric field, and
so on. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields thus regenerate each
other, so to speak, as the wave propagates through the space.
The frequency of the electromagnetic wave naturally equals the
frequency of oscillation of the charge. The energy associated with the
propagating wave comes at the expense of the energy of the source – the
accelerated charge.
From the preceding discussion, it might appear easy to test the
prediction that light is an electromagnetic wave. We might think that all
we needed to do was to set up an ac circuit in which the current oscillate
at the frequency of visible light, say, yellow light. But, alas, that is not
possible. The frequency of yellow light is about 6 × 1014 Hz, while the
frequency that we get even with modern electronic circuits is hardly about
1011 Hz. This is why the experimental demonstration of electromagnetic
wave had to come in the low frequency region (the radio wave region), as
in the Hertz’s experiment (1887).
Hertz’s successful experimental test of Maxwell’s theory created a
sensation and sparked off other important works in this field. Two
important achievements in this connection deserve mention. Seven years
after Hertz, Jagdish Chandra Bose, working at Calcutta (now Kolkata),

Electromagnetic
Waves
succeeded in producing and observing electromagnetic
waves of much shorter wavelength (25 mm to 5 mm).
His experiment, like that of Hertz’s, was confined to the
laboratory.
At around the same time, Guglielmo Marconi in Italy
followed Hertz’s work and succeeded in transmitting
electromagnetic waves over distances of many kilometres.
Marconi’s experiment marks the beginning of the field of
communication using electromagnetic waves.

8.3.2 Nature of electromagnetic waves

Ex= E0 sin (kz–ωt )

[8.7(a)]

Heinrich Rudolf Hertz
(1857 – 1894) German
physicist who was the
first to broadcast and
receive radio waves. He
produced
electromagnetic waves, sent
them through space, and
measured their wavelength and speed. He
showed that the nature
of
their
vibration,
reflection and refraction
was the same as that of
light and heat waves,
establishing
their
identity for the first time.
He
also
pioneered
research on discharge of
electricity through gases,
and discovered the
photoelectric effect.

HEINRICH RUDOLF HERTZ (1857–1894)

It can be shown from Maxwell’s equations that electric
and magnetic fields in an electromagnetic wave are
perpendicular to each other, and to the direction of
propagation. It appears reasonable, say from our
discussion of the displacement current. Consider
Fig. 8.2. The electric field inside the plates of the capacitor
is directed perpendicular to the plates. The magnetic
field this gives rise to via the displacement current is
along the perimeter of a circle parallel to the capacitor
plates. So B and E are perpendicular in this case. This
is a general feature.
In Fig. 8.4, we show a typical example of a plane
electromagnetic wave propagating along the z direction
(the fields are shown as a function of the z coordinate,
at a given time t). The electric field Ex is along the x-axis,
and varies sinusoidally with z, at a given time. The
magnetic field By is along the y-axis, and again varies
sinusoidally with z. The electric and magnetic fields Ex
and By are perpendicular to each other, and to the
direction z of propagation. We can write Ex and By as
follows:
[8.7(b)]
By= B0 sin (kz–ωt )
Here k is related to the wave length λ of the wave by the
usual equation
k=

2π

(8.8)
λ
and ω is the angular frequency. k
is the magnitude of the wave
vector (or propagation vector) k
and its direction describes the
direction of propagation of the
wave. The speed of propagation
of the wave is ( ω/k ). Using
Eqs. [8.7(a) and (b)] for Ex and By
and Maxwell’s equations, one
finds that

FIGURE 8.4 A linearly polarised electromagnetic wave,
propagating in the z-direction with the oscillating electric field E
along the x-direction and the oscillating magnetic field B along
the y-direction.

275

Physics

Simulate propagation of electromagnetic waves
(i) http://www.amanogawa.com/waves.html
(ii) http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/java/ntnujava/emWave/emWave.html

ω = ck, where, c = 1/ μ0 ε 0

276

[8.9(a)]

The relation ω = ck is the standard one for waves (see for example,
Section 15.4 of class XI Physics textbook). This relation is often written
in terms of frequency, ν (=ω/2π) and wavelength, λ (=2π/k) as
⎛ 2π ⎞
2πν = c ⎜ ⎟ or
⎝ λ ⎠
νλ = c
[8.9(b)]
It is also seen from Maxwell’s equations that the magnitude of the
electric and the magnetic fields in an electromagnetic wave are related as
B0 = (E0/c)

(8.10)

We here make remarks on some features of electromagnetic waves.
They are self-sustaining oscillations of electric and magnetic fields in free
space, or vacuum. They differ from all the other waves we have studied
so far, in respect that no material medium is involved in the vibrations of
the electric and magnetic fields. Sound waves in air are longitudinal waves
of compression and rarefaction. Transverse waves on the surface of water
consist of water moving up and down as the wave spreads horizontally
and radially onwards. Transverse elastic (sound) waves can also propagate
in a solid, which is rigid and that resists shear. Scientists in the nineteenth
century were so much used to this mechanical picture that they thought
that there must be some medium pervading all space and all matter,
which responds to electric and magnetic fields just as any elastic medium
does. They called this medium ether. They were so convinced of the reality
of this medium, that there is even a novel called The Poison Belt by Sir
Arthur Conan Doyle (the creator of the famous detective Sherlock Holmes)
where the solar system is supposed to pass through a poisonous region
of ether! We now accept that no such physical medium is needed. The
famous experiment of Michelson and Morley in 1887 demolished
conclusively the hypothesis of ether. Electric and magnetic fields,
oscillating in space and time, can sustain each other in vacuum.
But what if a material medium is actually there? We know that light,
an electromagnetic wave, does propagate through glass, for example. We
have seen earlier that the total electric and magnetic fields inside a
medium are described in terms of a permittivity ε and a magnetic
permeability μ (these describe the factors by which the total fields differ
from the external fields). These replace ε0 and μ0 in the description to
electric and magnetic fields in Maxwell’s equations with the result that in
a material medium of permittivity ε and magnetic permeability μ, the
velocity of light becomes,
1
v=
(8.11)
με
Thus, the velocity of light depends on electric and magnetic properties of
the medium. We shall see in the next chapter that the refractive index of
one medium with respect to the other is equal to the ratio of velocities of
light in the two media.
The velocity of electromagnetic waves in free space or vacuum is an
important fundamental constant. It has been shown by experiments on
electromagnetic waves of different wavelengths that this velocity is the

Electromagnetic
Waves
same (independent of wavelength) to within a few metres per second, out
of a value of 3×108 m/s. The constancy of the velocity of em waves in
vacuum is so strongly supported by experiments and the actual value is
so well known now that this is used to define a standard of length.
Namely, the metre is now defined as the distance travelled by light in
vacuum in a time (1/c) seconds = (2.99792458 × 108)–1 seconds. This
has come about for the following reason. The basic unit of time can be
defined very accurately in terms of some atomic frequency, i.e., frequency
of light emitted by an atom in a particular process. The basic unit of length
is harder to define as accurately in a direct way. Earlier measurement of c
using earlier units of length (metre rods, etc.) converged to a value of about
2.9979246 × 108 m/s. Since c is such a strongly fixed number, unit of
length can be defined in terms of c and the unit of time!
Hertz not only showed the existence of electromagnetic waves, but
also demonstrated that the waves, which had wavelength ten million times
that of the light waves, could be diffracted, refracted and polarised. Thus,
he conclusively established the wave nature of the radiation. Further, he
produced stationary electromagnetic waves and determined their
wavelength by measuring the distance between two successive nodes.
Since the frequency of the wave was known (being equal to the frequency
of the oscillator), he obtained the speed of the wave using the formula
v = νλ and found that the waves travelled with the same speed as the
speed of light.
The fact that electromagnetic waves are polarised can be easily seen
in the response of a portable AM radio to a broadcasting station. If an
AM radio has a telescopic antenna, it responds to the electric part of the
signal. When the antenna is turned horizontal, the signal will be greatly
diminished. Some portable radios have horizontal antenna (usually inside
the case of radio), which are sensitive to the magnetic component of the
electromagnetic wave. Such a radio must remain horizontal in order to
receive the signal. In such cases, response also depends on the orientation
of the radio with respect to the station.
Do electromagnetic waves carry energy and momentum like other
waves? Yes, they do. We have seen in chapter 2 that in a region of free
space with electric field E, there is an energy density (ε0E2/2). Similarly,
as seen in Chapter 6, associated with a magnetic field B is a magnetic
energy density (B2/2μ0). As electromagnetic wave contains both electric
and magnetic fields, there is a non-zero energy density associated with
it. Now consider a plane perpendicular to the direction of propagation of
the electromagnetic wave (Fig. 8.4). If there are, on this plane, electric
charges, they will be set and sustained in motion by the electric and
magnetic fields of the electromagnetic wave. The charges thus acquire
energy and momentum from the waves. This just illustrates the fact that
an electromagnetic wave (like other waves) carries energy and momentum.
Since it carries momentum, an electromagnetic wave also exerts pressure,
called radiation pressure.
If the total energy transferred to a surface in time t is U, it can be shown
that the magnitude of the total momentum delivered to this surface (for
complete absorption) is,
p=

U
c

(8.12)

277

Physics
When the sun shines on your hand, you feel the energy being
absorbed from the electromagnetic waves (your hands get warm).
Electromagnetic waves also transfer momentum to your hand but
because c is very large, the amount of momentum transferred is extremely
small and you do not feel the pressure. In 1903, the American scientists
Nicols and Hull succeeded in measuring radiation pressure of
visible light and verified Eq. (8.12). It was found to be of the order of
7 × 10–6 N/m2. Thus, on a surface of area 10 cm2, the force due to radiation
is only about 7 × 10–9 N.
The great technological importance of electromagnetic waves stems
from their capability to carry energy from one place to another. The
radio and TV signals from broadcasting stations carry energy. Light
carries energy from the sun to the earth, thus making life possible on
the earth.
Example 8.2 A plane electromagnetic wave of frequency
25 MHz travels in free space along the x-direction. At a particular
point in space and time, E = 6.3 ĵ V/m. What is B at this point?
Solution Using Eq. (8.10), the magnitude of B is

E
c
6.3 V/m
=
= 2.1 × 10 –8 T
3 × 108 m/s

E XAMPLE 8.2

B=

To find the direction, we note that E is along y-direction and the
wave propagates along x-axis. Therefore, B should be in a direction
perpendicular to both x- and y-axes. Using vector algebra, E × B should
be along x-direction. Since, (+ ĵ ) × (+ k̂ ) = î , B is along the z-direction.
Thus,
B = 2.1 × 10–8 k̂ T
Example 8.3 The magnetic field in a plane electromagnetic wave is
given by By = 2 × 10–7 sin (0.5×103x+1.5×1011t) T.
(a) What is the wavelength and frequency of the wave?
(b) Write an expression for the electric field.
Solution
(a) Comparing the given equation with

⎡ ⎛ x t ⎞⎤
By = B0 sin ⎢2π ⎜⎝ + ⎟⎠ ⎥
λ T ⎦
⎣

278

E XAMPLE 8.3

We get, λ =

2π
m = 1.26 cm,
0.5 × 103

(

)

1
= ν = 1.5 × 1011 /2π = 23.9 GHz
T
(b) E0 = B0c = 2×10–7 T × 3 × 108 m/s = 6 × 101 V/m
The electric field component is perpendicular to the direction of
propagation and the direction of magnetic field. Therefore, the
electric field component along the z-axis is obtained as
Ez = 60 sin (0.5 × 103x + 1.5 × 1011 t) V/m
and

Electromagnetic
Waves
Example 8.4 Light with an energy flux of 18 W/cm2 falls on a nonreflecting surface at normal incidence. If the surface has an area of
20 cm2, find the average force exerted on the surface during a 30
minute time span.
Solution
The total energy falling on the surface is
U = (18 W/cm2) × (20 cm2) × (30 × 60)
= 6.48 × 105 J
Therefore, the total momentum delivered (for complete absorption) is

p 2.16 × 10 −3
=
= 1.2 × 10 −6 N
t
0.18 × 104
How will your result be modified if the surface is a perfect reflector?

F=

EXAMPLE 8.4

U 6.48 × 105 J
= 2.16 × 10–3 kg m/s
p= c =
3 × 108 m/s
The average force exerted on the surface is

Example 8.5 Calculate the electric and magnetic fields produced by
the radiation coming from a 100 W bulb at a distance of 3 m. Assume
that the efficiency of the bulb is 2.5% and it is a point source.
Solution The bulb, as a point source, radiates light in all directions
uniformly. At a distance of 3 m, the surface area of the surrounding
sphere is

A = 4 π r 2 = 4 π (3)2 = 113 m2
The intensity at this distance is
I =

Power 100 W × 2.5 %
=
Area
113 m 2

= 0.022 W/m2
Half of this intensity is provided by the electric field and half by the
magnetic field.

(

)

1
1
2
I =
ε 0 Erms
c
2
2
1
=
0.022 W/m 2
2

(

Erms =

)

0.022

(8.85 × 10 )(3 × 10 )
−12

8

V/m

= 2.9 V/m
The value of E found above is the root mean square value of the
electric field. Since the electric field in a light beam is sinusoidal, the
peak electric field, E0 is

EXAMPLE 8.5

2E rms = 2 × 2.9 V/m
= 4.07 V/m
Thus, you see that the electric field strength of the light that you use
for reading is fairly large. Compare it with electric field strength of
TV or FM waves, which is of the order of a few microvolts per metre.

E0 =

279

Physics
EXAMPLE 8.5

Now, let us calculate the strength of the magnetic field. It is

Erms
2.9 V m −1
=
= 9.6 × 10–9 T
c
3 × 108 m s −1
Again, since the field in the light beam is sinusoidal, the peak
magnetic field is B0 = 2 Brms = 1.4 × 10–8 T. Note that although the
energy in the magnetic field is equal to the energy in the electric
field, the magnetic field strength is evidently very weak.
Brms =

Electromagnetic spectrum
http://www.fnal.gov/pub/inquiring/more/light
http://imagine.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/science/

8.4 ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM

280

At the time Maxwell predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves, the
only familiar electromagnetic waves were the visible light waves. The existence
of ultraviolet and infrared waves was barely established. By the end of the
nineteenth century, X-rays and gamma rays had also been discovered. We
now know that, electromagnetic waves include visible light waves, X-rays,
gamma rays, radio waves, microwaves, ultraviolet and infrared waves. The
classification of em waves according to frequency is the electromagnetic
spectrum (Fig. 8.5). There is no sharp division between one kind of wave
and the next. The classification is based roughly on how the waves are
produced and/or detected.

FIGURE 8.5 The electromagnetic spectrum, with common names for various
part of it. The various regions do not have sharply defined boundaries.

Electromagnetic
Waves
We briefly describe these different types of electromagnetic waves, in
order of decreasing wavelengths.

8.4.1 Radio waves
Radio waves are produced by the accelerated motion of charges in conducting
wires. They are used in radio and television communication systems. They
are generally in the frequency range from 500 kHz to about 1000 MHz.
The AM (amplitude modulated) band is from 530 kHz to 1710 kHz. Higher
frequencies upto 54 MHz are used for short wave bands. TV waves range
from 54 MHz to 890 MHz. The FM (frequency modulated) radio band
extends from 88 MHz to 108 MHz. Cellular phones use radio waves to
transmit voice communication in the ultrahigh frequency (UHF) band. How
these waves are transmitted and received is described in Chapter 15.

8.4.2 Microwaves
Microwaves (short-wavelength radio waves), with frequencies in the
gigahertz (GHz) range, are produced by special vacuum tubes (called
klystrons, magnetrons and Gunn diodes). Due to their short wavelengths,
they are suitable for the radar systems used in aircraft navigation. Radar
also provides the basis for the speed guns used to time fast balls, tennisserves, and automobiles. Microwave ovens are an interesting domestic
application of these waves. In such ovens, the frequency of the microwaves
is selected to match the resonant frequency of water molecules so that
energy from the waves is transferred efficiently to the kinetic energy of
the molecules. This raises the temperature of any food containing water.

MICROWAVE

OVEN

The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation contains a part known as microwaves. These
waves have frequency and energy smaller than visible light and wavelength larger than it.
What is the principle of a microwave oven and how does it work?
Our objective is to cook food or warm it up. All food items such as fruit, vegetables,
meat, cereals, etc., contain water as a constituent. Now, what does it mean when we say that
a certain object has become warmer? When the temperature of a body rises, the energy of
the random motion of atoms and molecules increases and the molecules travel or vibrate or
rotate with higher energies. The frequency of rotation of water molecules is about 300 crore
hertz, which is 3 gigahertz (GHz). If water receives microwaves of this frequency, its molecules
absorb this radiation, which is equivalent to heating up water. These molecules share this
energy with neighbouring food molecules, heating up the food.
One should use porcelain vessels and not metal containers in a microwave oven because
of the danger of getting a shock from accumulated electric charges. Metals may also melt
from heating. The porcelain container remains unaffected and cool, because its large
molecules vibrate and rotate with much smaller frequencies, and thus cannot absorb
microwaves. Hence, they do not get heated up.
Thus, the basic principle of a microwave oven is to generate microwave radiation of
appropriate frequency in the working space of the oven where we keep food. This way
energy is not wasted in heating up the vessel. In the conventional heating method, the vessel
on the burner gets heated first, and then the food inside gets heated because of transfer of
energy from the vessel. In the microwave oven, on the other hand, energy is directly delivered
to water molecules which is shared by the entire food.

281

Physics
8.4.3 Infrared waves
Infrared waves are produced by hot bodies and molecules. This band
lies adjacent to the low-frequency or long-wave length end of the visible
spectrum. Infrared waves are sometimes referred to as heat waves. This
is because water molecules present in most materials readily absorb
infrared waves (many other molecules, for example, CO2, NH3, also absorb
infrared waves). After absorption, their thermal motion increases, that is,
they heat up and heat their surroundings. Infrared lamps are used in
physical therapy. Infrared radiation also plays an important role in
maintaining the earth’s warmth or average temperature through the
greenhouse effect. Incoming visible light (which passes relatively easily
through the atmosphere) is absorbed by the earth’s surface and reradiated as infrared (longer wavelength) radiations. This radiation is
trapped by greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and water vapour.
Infrared detectors are used in Earth satellites, both for military purposes
and to observe growth of crops. Electronic devices (for example
semiconductor light emitting diodes) also emit infrared and are widely
used in the remote switches of household electronic systems such as TV
sets, video recorders and hi-fi systems.

8.4.4 Visible rays
It is the most familiar form of electromagnetic waves. It is the part of the
spectrum that is detected by the human eye. It runs from about
4 × 1014 Hz to about 7 × 1014 Hz or a wavelength range of about 700 –
400 nm. Visible light emitted or reflected from objects around us provides
us information about the world. Our eyes are sensitive to this range of
wavelengths. Different animals are sensitive to different range of
wavelengths. For example, snakes can detect infrared waves, and the
‘visible’ range of many insects extends well into the utraviolet.

8.4.5 Ultraviolet rays

282

It covers wavelengths ranging from about 4 × 10–7 m (400 nm) down to
6 × 10–10m (0.6 nm). Ultraviolet (UV) radiation is produced by special
lamps and very hot bodies. The sun is an important source of ultraviolet
light. But fortunately, most of it is absorbed in the ozone layer in the
atmosphere at an altitude of about 40 – 50 km. UV light in large quantities
has harmful effects on humans. Exposure to UV radiation induces the
production of more melanin, causing tanning of the skin. UV radiation is
absorbed by ordinary glass. Hence, one cannot get tanned or sunburn
through glass windows.
Welders wear special glass goggles or face masks with glass windows
to protect their eyes from large amount of UV produced by welding arcs.
Due to its shorter wavelengths, UV radiations can be focussed into very
narrow beams for high precision applications such as LASIK (Laserassisted in situ keratomileusis) eye surgery. UV lamps are used to kill
germs in water purifiers.
Ozone layer in the atmosphere plays a protective role, and hence its
depletion by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) gas (such as freon) is a matter
of international concern.

Electromagnetic
Waves
8.4.6 X-rays
Beyond the UV region of the electromagnetic spectrum lies the X-ray
region. We are familiar with X-rays because of its medical applications. It
covers wavelengths from about 10 –8 m (10 nm) down to 10 –13 m
(10–4 nm). One common way to generate X-rays is to bombard a metal
target by high energy electrons. X-rays are used as a diagnostic tool in
medicine and as a treatment for certain forms of cancer. Because X-rays
damage or destroy living tissues and organisms, care must be taken to
avoid unnecessary or over exposure.

8.4.7 Gamma rays
They lie in the upper frequency range of the electromagnetic spectrum
and have wavelengths of from about 10–10m to less than 10–14m. This
high frequency radiation is produced in nuclear reactions and
also emitted by radioactive nuclei. They are used in medicine to destroy
cancer cells.
Table 8.1 summarises different types of electromagnetic waves, their
production and detections. As mentioned earlier, the demarcation
between different region is not sharp and there are over laps.

TABLE 8.1 DIFFERENT TYPES OF ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Type

Wavelength range

Production

Detection

Radio

> 0.1 m

Rapid acceleration and
decelerations of electrons
in aerials

Receiver’s aerials

Microwave

0.1m to 1 mm

Klystron valve or
magnetron valve

Point contact diodes

Infra-red

1mm to 700 nm

Vibration of atoms
and molecules

Thermopiles
Bolometer, Infrared
photographic film

Light

700 nm to 400 nm

Electrons in atoms emit
light when they move from
one energy level to a
lower energy level

The eye
Photocells
Photographic film

Ultraviolet

400 nm to 1nm

Inner shell electrons in
atoms moving from one
energy level to a lower level

Photocells
Photographic film

X-rays

1nm to 10–3 nm

X-ray tubes or inner shell
electrons

Photographic film
Geiger tubes
Ionisation chamber

Gamma rays

<10–3 nm

Radioactive decay of the
nucleus

-do-

283

Physics
SUMMARY
1.

Maxwell found an inconsistency in the Ampere’s law and suggested the
existence of an additional current, called displacement current, to remove
this inconsistency. This displacement current is due to time-varying electric
field and is given by

id = ε0

2.

3.

4.

dΦΕ
dt

and acts as a source of magnetic field in exactly the same way as conduction
current.
An accelerating charge produces electromagnetic waves. An electric charge
oscillating harmonically with frequency ν, produces electromagnetic waves
of the same frequency ν . An electric dipole is a basic source of
electromagnetic waves.
Electromagnetic waves with wavelength of the order of a few metres were
first produced and detected in the laboratory by Hertz in 1887. He thus
verified a basic prediction of Maxwell’s equations.
Electric and magnetic fields oscillate sinusoidally in space and time in an
electromagnetic wave. The oscillating electric and magnetic fields, E and
B are perpendicular to each other, and to the direction of propagation of
the electromagnetic wave. For a wave of frequency ν, wavelength λ,
propagating along z-direction, we have
E = Ex (t) = E0 sin (kz – ω t )

⎡ ⎛z
⎡ ⎛ z t ⎞⎤
⎞⎤
⎢2π ⎜⎝ λ − νt ⎟⎠ ⎥ = E 0 sin ⎢2π ⎜⎝ λ − T ⎟⎠ ⎥
⎣
⎦
⎣
⎦
B = By(t) = B0 sin (kz – ω t)
= E0 sin

⎡
⎣

5.

⎡ ⎛ z t ⎞⎤
⎞⎤
− νt ⎟ ⎥ = B0 sin ⎢2π ⎜ − ⎟ ⎥
⎠
λ
⎦
⎣ ⎝ λ T ⎠⎦

⎛z

= B0 sin ⎢2π ⎜⎝

They are related by E0/B0 = c.
The speed c of electromagnetic wave in vacuum is related to μ0 and ε0 (the
free space permeability and permittivity constants) as follows:

c = 1/ μ 0 ε 0 . The value of c equals the speed of light obtained from
optical measurements.
Light is an electromagnetic wave; c is, therefore, also the speed of light.
Electromagnetic waves other than light also have the same velocity c in
free space.
The speed of light, or of electromagnetic waves in a material medium is
given by v = 1/ μ ε
6.

7.

284

where μ is the permeability of the medium and ε its permittivity.
Electromagnetic waves carry energy as they travel through space and this
energy is shared equally by the electric and magnetic fields.
Electromagnetic waves transport momentum as well. When these waves
strike a surface, a pressure is exerted on the surface. If total energy
transferred to a surface in time t is U, total momentum delivered to this
surface is p = U/c.
The spectrum of electromagnetic waves stretches, in principle, over an
infinite range of wavelengths. Different regions are known by different

Electromagnetic
Waves
names; γ-rays, X-rays, ultraviolet rays, visible rays, infrared rays,
microwaves and radio waves in order of increasing wavelength from 10–2 Å
or 10–12 m to 106 m.
They interact with matter via their electric and magnetic fields which set
in oscillation charges present in all matter. The detailed interaction and
so the mechanism of absorption, scattering, etc., depend on the wavelength
of the electromagnetic wave, and the nature of the atoms and molecules
in the medium.

POINTS TO PONDER
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

The basic difference between various types of electromagnetic waves
lies in their wavelengths or frequencies since all of them travel through
vacuum with the same speed. Consequently, the waves differ
considerably in their mode of interaction with matter.
Accelerated charged particles radiate electromagnetic waves. The
wavelength of the electromagnetic wave is often correlated with the
characteristic size of the system that radiates. Thus, gamma radiation,
having wavelength of 10–14 m to 10–15 m, typically originate from an
atomic nucleus. X-rays are emitted from heavy atoms. Radio waves
are produced by accelerating electrons in a circuit. A transmitting
antenna can most efficiently radiate waves having a wavelength of
about the same size as the antenna. Visible radiation emitted by atoms
is, however, much longer in wavelength than atomic size.
The oscillating fields of an electromagnetic wave can accelerate charges
and can produce oscillating currents. Therefore, an apparatus designed
to detect electromagnetic waves is based on this fact. Hertz original
‘receiver’ worked in exactly this way. The same basic principle is utilised
in practically all modern receiving devices. High frequency
electromagnetic waves are detected by other means based on the
physical effects they produce on interacting with matter.
Infrared waves, with frequencies lower than those of visible light,
vibrate not only the electrons, but entire atoms or molecules of a
substance. This vibration increases the internal energy and
consequently, the temperature of the substance. This is why infrared
waves are often called heat waves.
The centre of sensitivity of our eyes coincides with the centre of the
wavelength distribution of the sun. It is because humans have evolved
with visions most sensitive to the strongest wavelengths from
the sun.

EXERCISES
8.1

Figure 8.6 shows a capacitor made of two circular plates each of
radius 12 cm, and separated by 5.0 cm. The capacitor is being
charged by an external source (not shown in the figure). The
charging current is constant and equal to 0.15A.
(a) Calculate the capacitance and the rate of charge of potential
difference between the plates.

285

Physics
(b) Obtain the displacement current across the plates.
(c) Is Kirchhoff’s first rule (junction rule) valid at each plate of the
capacitor? Explain.

FIGURE 8.6

8.2

A parallel plate capacitor (Fig. 8.7) made of circular plates each of radius
R = 6.0 cm has a capacitance C = 100 pF. The capacitor is connected to
a 230 V ac supply with a (angular) frequency of 300 rad s–1.
(a) What is the rms value of the conduction current?
(b) Is the conduction current equal to the displacement current?
(c) Determine the amplitude of B at a point 3.0 cm from the axis
between the plates.

8.3

What physical quantity is the same for X-rays of wavelength
10–10 m, red light of wavelength 6800 Å and radiowaves of wavelength
500m?
A plane electromagnetic wave travels in vacuum along z-direction.
What can you say about the directions of its electric and magnetic
field vectors? If the frequency of the wave is 30 MHz, what is its
wavelength?
A radio can tune in to any station in the 7.5 MHz to 12 MHz band.
What is the corresponding wavelength band?
A charged particle oscillates about its mean equilibrium position
with a frequency of 10 9 Hz. What is the frequency of the
electromagnetic waves produced by the oscillator?
The amplitude of the magnetic field part of a harmonic
electromagnetic wave in vacuum is B 0 = 510 nT. What is the
amplitude of the electric field part of the wave?
Suppose that the electric field amplitude of an electromagnetic wave
is E0 = 120 N/C and that its frequency is ν = 50.0 MHz. (a) Determine,
B0,ω, k, and λ. (b) Find expressions for E and B.
The terminology of different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum
is given in the text. Use the formula E = hν (for energy of a quantum
of radiation: photon) and obtain the photon energy in units of eV for
different parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. In what way are
the different scales of photon energies that you obtain related to the
sources of electromagnetic radiation?
In a plane electromagnetic wave, the electric field oscillates
sinusoidally at a frequency of 2.0 × 1010 Hz and amplitude 48 V m–1.

FIGURE 8.7

8.4

8.5
8.6

8.7

8.8

8.9

286

8.10

Electromagnetic
Waves
(a) What is the wavelength of the wave?
(b) What is the amplitude of the oscillating magnetic field?
(c) Show that the average energy density of the E field equals the
average energy density of the B field. [c = 3 × 108 m s–1.]

ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
8.11

8.12

8.13

8.14

8.15

Suppose that the electric field part of an electromagnetic wave in
vacuum is E = {(3.1 N/C) cos [(1.8 rad/m) y + (5.4 × 106 rad/s)t]} î .
(a) What is the direction of propagation?
(b) What is the wavelength λ ?
(c) What is the frequency ν ?
(d) What is the amplitude of the magnetic field part of the wave?
(e) Write an expression for the magnetic field part of the wave.
About 5% of the power of a 100 W light bulb is converted to visible
radiation. What is the average intensity of visible radiation
(a) at a distance of 1m from the bulb?
(b) at a distance of 10 m?
Assume that the radiation is emitted isotropically and neglect
reflection.
Use the formula λ m T = 0.29 cm K to obtain the characteristic
temperature ranges for different parts of the electromagnetic
spectrum. What do the numbers that you obtain tell you?
Given below are some famous numbers associated with
electromagnetic radiations in different contexts in physics. State
the part of the electromagnetic spectrum to which each belongs.
(a) 21 cm (wavelength emitted by atomic hydrogen in interstellar
space).
(b) 1057 MHz (frequency of radiation arising from two close energy
levels in hydrogen; known as Lamb shift).
(c) 2.7 K [temperature associated with the isotropic radiation filling
all space-thought to be a relic of the ‘big-bang’ origin of the
universe].
(d) 5890 Å - 5896 Å [double lines of sodium]
(e) 14.4 keV [energy of a particular transition in 57 Fe nucleus
associated with a famous high resolution spectroscopic method
(Mössbauer spectroscopy)].
Answer the following questions:
(a) Long distance radio broadcasts use short-wave bands. Why?
(b) It is necessary to use satellites for long distance TV transmission.
Why?
(c) Optical and radiotelescopes are built on the ground but X-ray
astronomy is possible only from satellites orbiting the earth.
Why?
(d) The small ozone layer on top of the stratosphere is crucial for
human survival. Why?
(e) If the earth did not have an atmosphere, would its average
surface temperature be higher or lower than what it is now?
(f ) Some scientists have predicted that a global nuclear war on the
earth would be followed by a severe ‘nuclear winter’ with a
devastating effect on life on earth. What might be the basis of
this prediction?

287

