Physics

Chapter Four

MOVING CHARGES
AND MAGNETISM

4.1 INTRODUCTION
Both Electricity and Magnetism have been known for more than 2000
years. However, it was only about 200 years ago, in 1820, that it was
realised that they were intimately related*. During a lecture demonstration
in the summer of 1820, the Danish physicist Hans Christian Oersted
noticed that a current in a straight wire caused a noticeable deflection in
a nearby magnetic compass needle. He investigated this phenomenon.
He found that the alignment of the needle is tangential to an imaginary
circle which has the straight wire as its centre and has its plane
perpendicular to the wire. This situation is depicted in Fig.4.1(a). It is
noticeable when the current is large and the needle sufficiently close to
the wire so that the earth’s magnetic field may be ignored. Reversing the
direction of the current reverses the orientation of the needle [Fig. 4.1(b)].
The deflection increases on increasing the current or bringing the needle
closer to the wire. Iron filings sprinkled around the wire arrange
themselves in concentric circles with the wire as the centre [Fig. 4.1(c)].
Oersted concluded that moving charges or currents produced a
magnetic field in the surrounding space.
Following this there was intense experimentation. In 1864, the laws
obeyed by electricity and magnetism were unified and formulated by

132

* See the box in Chapter 1, Page 3.

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
James Maxwell who then realised that light was electromagnetic waves.
Radio waves were discovered by Hertz, and produced by J.C.Bose and
G. Marconi by the end of the 19th century. A remarkable scientific and
technological progress has taken place in the 20th century. This is due to
our increased understanding of electromagnetism and the invention of
devices for production, amplification, transmission and detection of
electromagnetic waves.

FIGURE 4.1 The magnetic field due to a straight long current-carrying
wire. The wire is perpendicular to the plane of the paper. A ring of
compass needles surrounds the wire. The orientation of the needles is
shown when (a) the current emerges out of the plane of the paper,
(b) the current moves into the plane of the paper. (c) The arrangement of
iron filings around the wire. The darkened ends of the needle represent
north poles. The effect of the earth’s magnetic field is neglected.

4.2 MAGNETIC FORCE
4.2.1 Sources and fields
Before we introduce the concept of a magnetic field B, we
shall recapitulate what we have learnt in Chapter 1 about
the electric field E. We have seen that the interaction
between two charges can be considered in two stages.
The charge Q, the source of the field, produces an electric
field E, where

Hans Christian Oersted
(1777–1851)
Danish
physicist and chemist,
professor at Copenhagen.
He
observed
that
a
compass needle suffers a
deflection when placed
near a wire carrying an
electric current. This
discovery gave the first
empirical evidence of a
connection between electric
and magnetic phenomena.

* A dot appears like the tip of an arrow pointed at you, a cross is like the feathered
tail of an arrow moving away from you.

HANS CHRISTIAN OERSTED (1777–1851)

In this chapter, we will see how magnetic field exerts
forces on moving charged particles, like electrons,
protons, and current-carrying wires. We shall also learn
how currents produce magnetic fields. We shall see how
particles can be accelerated to very high energies in a
cyclotron. We shall study how currents and voltages are
detected by a galvanometer.
In this and subsequent Chapter on magnetism,
we adopt the following convention: A current or a
field (electric or magnetic) emerging out of the plane of the
paper is depicted by a dot (¤). A current or a field going
into the plane of the paper is depicted by a cross ( ⊗ )*.
Figures. 4.1(a) and 4.1(b) correspond to these two
situations, respectively.

133

Physics
E = Q r̂ / (4πε 0)r2

(4.1)

where r̂ is unit vector along r, and the field E is a vector
field. A charge q interacts with this field and experiences
a force F given by

HENDRIK ANTOON LORENTZ (1853 – 1928)

F = q E = q Q r̂ / (4πε0) r 2

Hendrik Antoon Lorentz
(1853 – 1928) Dutch
theoretical
physicist,
professor at Leiden. He
investigated
the
relationship
between
electricity, magnetism, and
mechanics. In order to
explain the observed effect
of magnetic fields on
emitters of light (Zeeman
effect), he postulated the
existence of electric charges
in the atom, for which he
was awarded the Nobel Prize
in 1902. He derived a set of
transformation equations
(known after him, as
Lorentz transformation
equations) by some tangled
mathematical arguments,
but he was not aware that
these equations hinge on a
new concept of space and
time.

As pointed out in the Chapter 1, the field E is not
just an artefact but has a physical role. It can convey
energy and momentum and is not established
instantaneously but takes finite time to propagate. The
concept of a field was specially stressed by Faraday and
was incorporated by Maxwell in his unification of
electricity and magnetism. In addition to depending on
each point in space, it can also vary with time, i.e., be a
function of time. In our discussions in this chapter, we
will assume that the fields do not change with time.
The field at a particular point can be due to one or
more charges. If there are more charges the fields add
vectorially. You have already learnt in Chapter 1 that this
is called the principle of superposition. Once the field is
known, the force on a test charge is given by Eq. (4.2).
Just as static charges produce an electric field, the
currents or moving charges produce (in addition) a
magnetic field, denoted by B (r), again a vector field. It
has several basic properties identical to the electric field.
It is defined at each point in space (and can in addition
depend on time). Experimentally, it is found to obey the
principle of superposition: the magnetic field of several
sources is the vector addition of magnetic field of each
individual source.

4.2.2 Magnetic Field, Lorentz Force
Let us suppose that there is a point charge q (moving
with a velocity v and, located at r at a given time t) in
presence of both the electric field E (r) and the magnetic
field B (r). The force on an electric charge q due to both of
them can be written as

F = q [ E (r) + v × B (r)] ≡ Felectric +Fmagnetic

134

(4.2)

(4.3)

This force was given first by H.A. Lorentz based on the extensive
experiments of Ampere and others. It is called the Lorentz force. You
have already studied in detail the force due to the electric field. If we
look at the interaction with the magnetic field, we find the following
features.
(i) It depends on q, v and B (charge of the particle, the velocity and the
magnetic field). Force on a negative charge is opposite to that on a
positive charge.
(ii) The magnetic force q [ v × B ] includes a vector product of velocity
and magnetic field. The vector product makes the force due to magnetic

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
field vanish (become zero) if velocity and magnetic field are parallel
or anti-parallel. The force acts in a (sideways) direction perpendicular
to both the velocity and the magnetic field.
Its direction is given by the screw rule or
right hand rule for vector (or cross) product
as illustrated in Fig. 4.2.
(iii) The magnetic force is zero if charge is not
moving (as then |v|= 0). Only a moving
charge feels the magnetic force.
The expression for the magnetic force helps
us to define the unit of the magnetic field, if
one takes q, F and v, all to be unity in the force
FIGURE 4.2 The direction of the magnetic
equation F = q [ v × B] =q v B sin θ n̂ , where θ
force acting on a charged particle. (a) The
is the angle between v and B [see Fig. 4.2 (a)].
force on a positively charged particle with
The magnitude of magnetic field B is 1 SI unit,
velocity v and making an angle θ with the
when the force acting on a unit charge (1 C),
magnetic field B is given by the right-hand
moving perpendicular to B with a speed 1m/s,
rule. (b) A moving charged particle q is
is one newton.
deflected in an opposite sense to –q in the
presence of magnetic field.
Dimensionally, we have [B] = [F/qv] and the unit
of B are Newton second / (coulomb metre). This
unit is called tesla (T ) named after Nikola Tesla
(1856 – 1943). Tesla is a rather large unit. A smaller unit (non-SI) called
gauss (=10–4 tesla) is also often used. The earth’s magnetic field is about
3.6 × 10–5 T. Table 4.1 lists magnetic fields over a wide range in the
universe.

TABLE 4.1 ORDER

OF MAGNITUDES OF MAGNETIC FIELDS IN A VARIETY OF PHYSICAL SITUATIONS

Physical situation

Magnitude of B (in tesla)

Surface of a neutron star
Typical large field in a laboratory

10 8
1

Near a small bar magnet

10 –2

On the earth’s surface

10 –5

Human nerve fibre

10 –10

Interstellar space

10 –12

4.2.3 Magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor
We can extend the analysis for force due to magnetic field on a single
moving charge to a straight rod carrying current. Consider a rod of a
uniform cross-sectional area A and length l. We shall assume one kind
of mobile carriers as in a conductor (here electrons). Let the number
density of these mobile charge carriers in it be n. Then the total number
of mobile charge carriers in it is nAl. For a steady current I in this
conducting rod, we may assume that each mobile carrier has an average

135

Physics
drift velocity vd (see Chapter 3). In the presence of an external magnetic
field B, the force on these carriers is:
F = (nAl)q vd × B
where q is the value of the charge on a carrier. Now nqvd is the current
density j and |(nq vd )|A is the current I (see Chapter 3 for the discussion
of current and current density). Thus,
F = [(nqevd )Al ] × B = [ jAl ] × B
= I1 × B
(4.4)
where l is a vector of magnitude l, the length of the rod, and with a direction
identical to the current I. Note that the current I is not a vector. In the last
step leading to Eq. (4.4), we have transferred the vector sign from j to l.
Equation (4.4) holds for a straight rod. In this equation, B is the external
magnetic field. It is not the field produced by the current-carrying rod. If
the wire has an arbitrary shape we can calculate the Lorentz force on it
by considering it as a collection of linear strips dlj and summing

F=

∑ Idl

j

×B

j

This summation can be converted to an integral in most cases.

ON

PERMITTIVITY AND PERMEABILITY

136

EXAMPLE 4.1

In the universal law of gravitation, we say that any two point masses exert a force on
each other which is proportional to the product of the masses m1, m2 and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance r between them. We write it as F = Gm1m2/r 2
where G is the universal constant of gravitation. Similarly in Coulomb’s law of electrostatics
we write the force between two point charges q1, q2, separated by a distance r as
F = kq1q2/r 2 where k is a constant of proportionality. In SI units, k is taken as
1/4πε where ε is the permittivity of the medium. Also in magnetism, we get another
constant, which in SI units, is taken as µ/4π where µ is the permeability of the medium.
Although G, ε and µ arise as proportionality constants, there is a difference between
gravitational force and electromagnetic force. While the gravitational force does not depend
on the intervening medium, the electromagnetic force depends on the medium between
the two charges or magnets. Hence while G is a universal constant, ε and µ depend on
the medium. They have different values for different media. The product εµ turns out to
be related to the speed v of electromagnetic radiation in the medium through εµ =1/ v 2.
Electric permittivity ε is a physical quantity that describes how an electric field affects
and is affected by a medium. It is determined by the ability of a material to polarise in
response to an applied field, and thereby to cancel, partially, the field inside the material.
Similarly, magnetic permeability µ is the ability of a substance to acquire magnetisation in
magnetic fields. It is a measure of the extent to which magnetic field can penetrate matter.

Example 4.1 A straight wire of mass 200 g and length 1.5 m carries
a current of 2 A. It is suspended in mid-air by a uniform horizontal
magnetic field B (Fig. 4.3). What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field?

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

FIGURE 4.3

Solution From Eq. (4.4), we find that there is an upward force F, of
magnitude IlB,. For mid-air suspension, this must be balanced by
the force due to gravity:
m g = I lB
B=

mg
Il

Solution The velocity v of particle is along the x-axis, while B, the
magnetic field is along the y-axis, so v × B is along the z-axis (screw
rule or right-hand thumb rule). So, (a) for electron it will be along –z
axis. (b) for a positive charge (proton) the force is along +z axis.

4.3 MOTION

IN A

EXAMPLE 4.2

FIGURE 4.4

Charged particles moving in a magnetic field.
Interactive demonstration:

Example 4.2 If the magnetic field is parallel to the positive y-axis
and the charged particle is moving along the positive x-axis (Fig. 4.4),
which way would the Lorentz force be for (a) an electron (negative
charge), (b) a proton (positive charge).

http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~teb/optics/java/partmagn/index.html

EXAMPLE 4.1

0.2 × 9.8
= 0.65 T
2 × 1.5
Note that it would have been sufficient to specify m/l, the mass per
unit length of the wire. The earth’s magnetic field is approximately
4 × 10–5 T and we have ignored it.
=

MAGNETIC FIELD

We will now consider, in greater detail, the motion of a charge moving in
a magnetic field. We have learnt in Mechanics (see Class XI book, Chapter
6) that a force on a particle does work if the force has a component along
(or opposed to) the direction of motion of the particle. In the case of motion

137

Physics

FIGURE 4.5 Circular motion

of a charge in a magnetic field, the magnetic force is
perpendicular to the velocity of the particle. So no work is done
and no change in the magnitude of the velocity is produced
(though the direction of momentum may be changed). [Notice
that this is unlike the force due to an electric field, q E, which
can have a component parallel (or antiparallel) to motion and
thus can transfer energy in addition to momentum.]
We shall consider motion of a charged particle in a uniform
magnetic field. First consider the case of v perpendicular to B.
The perpendicular force, q v × B, acts as a centripetal force and
produces a circular motion perpendicular to the magnetic field.
The particle will describe a circle if v and B are perpendicular
to each other (Fig. 4.5).
If velocity has a component along B, this component
remains unchanged as the motion along the magnetic field will
not be affected by the magnetic field. The motion
in a plane perpendicular to B is as before a
circular one, thereby producing a helical motion
(Fig. 4.6).
You have already learnt in earlier classes
(See Class XI, Chapter 4) that if r is the radius
of the circular path of a particle, then a force of
m v2 / r, acts perpendicular to the path towards
the centre of the circle, and is called the
centripetal force. If the velocity v is
perpendicular to the magnetic field B, the
magnetic force is perpendicular to both v and
B and acts like a centripetal force. It has a
magnitude q v B. Equating the two expressions
for centripetal force,
m v 2/r = q v B, which gives
r = m v / qB

for the radius of the circle described by the
charged particle. The larger the momentum,
the larger is the radius and bigger the circle described. If ω is the angular
frequency, then v = ω r. So,
ω = 2π ν = q B/ m
[4.6(a)]
which is independent of the velocity or energy . Here ν is the frequency of
rotation. The independence of ν from energy has important application
in the design of a cyclotron (see Section 4.4.2).
The time taken for one revolution is T= 2π/ω ≡ 1/ν. If there is a
component of the velocity parallel to the magnetic field (denoted by v||), it
will make the particle move along the field and the path of the particle
would be a helical one (Fig. 4.6). The distance moved along the magnetic
field in one rotation is called pitch p. Using Eq. [4.6 (a)], we have
p = v||T = 2πm v|| / q B
[4.6(b)]
The radius of the circular component of motion is called the radius of
the helix.

FIGURE 4.6 Helical motion

138

(4.5)

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Example 4.3 What is the radius of the path of an electron (mass
9 × 10-31 kg and charge 1.6 × 10–19 C) moving at a speed of 3 ×107 m/s in
a magnetic field of 6 × 10 –4 T perpendicular to it? What is its
frequency? Calculate its energy in keV. ( 1 eV = 1.6 × 10–19 J).

HELICAL

EXAMPLE 4.3

Solution Using Eq. (4.5) we find
r = m v / (qB) = 9 ×10–31 kg × 3 × 107 m s–1 / ( 1.6 × 10–19 C × 6 × 10–4 T )
= 26 × 10–2 m = 26 cm
ν = v / (2 πr) = 2×106 s–1 = 2×106 Hz =2 MHz.
E = (½ )mv 2 = (½ ) 9 × 10–31 kg × 9 × 1014 m2/s2 = 40.5 ×10–17 J
–16
≈ 4×10 J = 2.5 keV.

MOTION OF CHARGED PARTICLES AND AURORA BORIOLIS

In polar regions like Alaska and Northern Canada, a splendid display of colours is seen
in the sky. The appearance of dancing green pink lights is fascinating, and equally
puzzling. An explanation of this natural phenomenon is now found in physics, in terms
of what we have studied here.
Consider a charged particle of mass m and charge q, entering a region of magnetic
field B with an initial velocity v. Let this velocity have a component vp parallel to the
magnetic field and a component vn normal to it. There is no force on a charged particle in
the direction of the field. Hence the particle continues to travel with the velocity vp parallel
to the field. The normal component vn of the particle results in a Lorentz force (vn × B)
which is perpendicular to both vn and B. As seen in Section 4.3.1 the particle thus has a
tendency to perform a circular motion in a plane perpendicular to the magnetic field.
When this is coupled with the velocity parallel to the field, the resulting trajectory will be
a helix along the magnetic field line, as shown in Figure (a) here. Even if the field line
bends, the helically moving particle is trapped and guided to move around the field line.
Since the Lorentz force is normal to the velocity of each point, the field does no work on
the particle and the magnitude of velocity remains the same.

During a solar flare, a large number of electrons and protons are ejected from the sun.
Some of them get trapped in the earth’s magnetic field and move in helical paths along the
field lines. The field lines come closer to each other near the magnetic poles; see figure (b).
Hence the density of charges increases near the poles. These particles collide with atoms
and molecules of the atmosphere. Excited oxygen atoms emit green light and excited
nitrogen atoms emits pink light. This phenomenon is called Aurora Boriolis in physics.

139

Physics
4.4 MOTION
FIELDS

IN

COMBINED ELECTRIC

AND

MAGNETIC

4.4.1 Velocity selector
You know that a charge q moving with velocity v in presence of both
electric and magnetic fields experiences a force given by Eq. (4.3), that is,
F = q (E + v × B) = FE + FB
We shall consider the simple case in which electric and magnetic
fields are perpendicular to each other and also perpendicular to
the velocity of the particle, as shown in Fig. 4.7. We have,
ˆ , v = v ˆi
E = E ˆj, B = B k
ˆ
ˆ = –qB ˆj
F = qE = qE j, F = qv × B, = q v ˆi × Bk
E

FIGURE 4.7

B

(

)

Therefore, F = q ( E – vB ) ˆj .
Thus, electric and magnetic forces are in opposite directions as
shown in the figure. Suppose, we adjust the value of E and B such
that magnitude of the two forces are equal. Then, total force on the
charge is zero and the charge will move in the fields undeflected.
This happens when,
E
(4.7)
B
This condition can be used to select charged particles of a particular
velocity out of a beam containing charges moving with different speeds
(irrespective of their charge and mass). The crossed E and B fields, therefore,
serve as a velocity selector. Only particles with speed E/B pass
undeflected through the region of crossed fields. This method was
employed by J. J. Thomson in 1897 to measure the charge to mass ratio
(e/m) of an electron. The principle is also employed in Mass Spectrometer –
a device that separates charged particles, usually ions, according to their
charge to mass ratio.

140

http://www.phy.ntnu.edu.tw/ntnujava/viewtopic.php?t=50

Cyclotron
Interactive demonstration:

qE = qvB or v =

4.4.2 Cyclotron
The cyclotron is a machine to accelerate charged particles or ions to high
energies. It was invented by E.O. Lawrence and M.S. Livingston in 1934
to investigate nuclear structure. The cyclotron uses both electric and
magnetic fields in combination to increase the energy of charged particles.
As the fields are perpendicular to each other they are called crossed
fields. Cyclotron uses the fact that the frequency of revolution of the
charged particle in a magnetic field is independent of its energy. The
particles move most of the time inside two semicircular disc-like metal
containers, D1 and D2, which are called dees as they look like the letter
D. Figure 4.8 shows a schematic view of the cyclotron. Inside the metal
boxes the particle is shielded and is not acted on by the electric field. The
magnetic field, however, acts on the particle and makes it go round in a
circular path inside a dee. Every time the particle moves from one dee to
another it is acted upon by the electric field. The sign of the electric field
is changed alternately in tune with the circular motion of the particle.
This ensures that the particle is always accelerated by the electric field.
Each time the acceleration increases the energy of the particle. As energy

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
increases, the radius of the circular path increases. So the path is a
spiral one.
The whole assembly is evacuated to minimise collisions between the
ions and the air molecules. A high frequency alternating voltage is applied
to the dees. In the sketch shown in Fig. 4.8, positive ions or positively
charged particles (e.g., protons) are released at the centre P. They move
in a semi-circular path in one of the dees and arrive in the gap between
the dees in a time interval T/2; where T, the period of revolution, is given
by Eq. (4.6),
T =

1
2πm
=
νc
qB

qB
(4.8)
2 πm
This frequency is called the cyclotron frequency for obvious reasons
and is denoted by νc .
The frequency νa of the applied voltage is adjusted so that the polarity
of the dees is reversed in the same time that it takes the ions to complete
one half of the revolution. The requirement νa = νc is called the resonance
condition. The phase of the supply is adjusted so that when the positive
ions arrive at the edge of D1, D2 is at a lower
potential and the ions are accelerated across the
gap. Inside the dees the particles travel in a region
free of the electric field. The increase in their
kinetic energy is qV each time they cross from
one dee to another (V refers to the voltage across
the dees at that time). From Eq. (4.5), it is clear
that the radius of their path goes on increasing
each time their kinetic energy increases. The ions
are repeatedly accelerated across the dees until
they have the required energy to have a radius
approximately that of the dees. They are then
deflected by a magnetic field and leave the system
via an exit slit. From Eq. (4.5) we have,

or ν c =

qBR
(4.9)
m
where R is the radius of the trajectory at exit, and
equals the radius of a dee.
Hence, the kinetic energy of the ions is,
v=

1
q2 B2R2
mv 2 =
2
2m

(4.10)

The operation of the cyclotron is based on the
fact that the time for one revolution of an ion is
independent of its speed or radius of its orbit.
The cyclotron is used to bombard nuclei with
energetic particles, so accelerated by it, and study

FIGURE 4.8 A schematic sketch of the
cyclotron. There is a source of charged
particles or ions at P which move in a
circular fashion in the dees, D1 and D2, on
account of a uniform perpendicular
magnetic field B. An alternating voltage
source accelerates these ions to high
speeds. The ions are eventually ‘extracted’
at the exit port.

141

Physics
the resulting nuclear reactions. It is also used to implant ions into solids
and modify their properties or even synthesise new materials. It is used
in hospitals to produce radioactive substances which can be used in
diagnosis and treatment.
Example 4.4 A cyclotron’s oscillator frequency is 10 MHz. What
should be the operating magnetic field for accelerating protons? If
the radius of its ‘dees’ is 60 cm, what is the kinetic energy (in MeV) of
the proton beam produced by the accelerator.

EXAMPLE 4.4

(e =1.60 × 10–19 C, mp = 1.67 × 10–27 kg, 1 MeV = 1.6 × 10–13 J).
Solution The oscillator frequency should be same as proton’s
cyclotron frequency.
Using Eqs. (4.5) and [4.6(a)] we have
B = 2π m ν/q =6.3 ×1.67 × 10–27 × 107 / (1.6 × 10–19) = 0.66 T
Final velocity of protons is
v = r × 2π ν = 0.6 m × 6.3 ×107 = 3.78 × 107 m/s.
E = ½ mv

2

= 1.67 ×10–27 × 14.3 × 1014 / (2 × 1.6 × 10–13) = 7 MeV.

ACCELERATORS

IN

INDIA

India has been an early entrant in the area of accelerator- based research. The vision of
Dr. Meghnath Saha created a 37" Cyclotron in the Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics in
Kolkata in 1953. This was soon followed by a series of Cockroft-Walton type of accelerators
established in Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai, Aligarh Muslim
University (AMU), Aligarh, Bose Institute, Kolkata and Andhra University, Waltair.
The sixties saw the commissioning of a number of Van de Graaff accelerators: a 5.5 MV
terminal machine in Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai (1963); a 2 MV terminal
machine in Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Kanpur; a 400 kV terminal machine in Banaras
Hindu University (BHU), Varanasi; and Punjabi University, Patiala. One 66 cm Cyclotron
donated by the Rochester University of USA was commissioned in Panjab University,
Chandigarh. A small electron accelerator was also established in University of Pune, Pune.
In a major initiative taken in the seventies and eighties, a Variable Energy Cyclotron was
built indigenously in Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (VECC), Kolkata; 2 MV Tandem Van
de Graaff accelerator was developed and built in BARC and a 14 MV Tandem Pelletron
accelerator was installed in TIFR.
This was soon followed by a 15 MV Tandem Pelletron established by University Grants
Commission (UGC), as an inter-university facility in Inter-University Accelerator Centre
(IUAC), New Delhi; a 3 MV Tandem Pelletron in Institute of Physics, Bhubaneshwar; and
two 1.7 MV Tandetrons in Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research,
Hyderabad and Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam. Both TIFR and
IUAC are augmenting their facilities with the addition of superconducting LINAC modules
to accelerate the ions to higher energies.
Besides these ion accelerators, the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) has developed
many electron accelerators. A 2 GeV Synchrotron Radiation Source is being built in Raja
Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technologies, Indore.
The Department of Atomic Energy is considering Accelerator Driven Systems (ADS) for
power production and fissile material breeding as future options.

142

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

4.5 MAGNETIC FIELD DUE
BIOT-SAVART LAW

TO A

CURRENT ELEMENT,

All magnetic fields that we know are due to currents (or moving charges)
and due to intrinsic magnetic moments of particles. Here, we shall study
the relation between current and the magnetic field it produces.
It is given by the Biot-Savart’s law. Figure 4.9 shows a finite
conductor XY carrying current I. Consider an infinitesimal
element dl of the conductor. The magnetic field dB due to this
element is to be determined at a point P which is at a distance r
from it. Let θ be the angle between dl and the displacement vector
r. According to Biot-Savart’s law, the magnitude of the magnetic
field dB is proportional to the current I, the element length |dl|,
and inversely proportional to the square of the distance r. Its
direction* is perpendicular to the plane containing dl and r .
Thus, in vector notation,
dB ∝
=

Idl×r
r3

µ0 I d l × r
4π r 3

[4.11(a)]

where µ0/4π is a constant of proportionality. The above
expression holds when the medium is vacuum.
The magnitude of this field is,

FIGURE 4.9 Illustration of
the Biot-Savart law. The
current element I dl
produces a field dB at a
distance r. The ⊗ sign
indicates that the
field is perpendicular
to the plane of this
page and directed
into it.

µ0 I dl sin θ
[4.11(b)]
4π
r2
where we have used the property of cross-product. Equation [4.11 (a)]
constitutes our basic equation for the magnetic field. The proportionality
constant in SI units has the exact value,
µ0
= 10 −7 Tm/A
[4.11(c)]
4π
We call µ0 the permeability of free space (or vacuum).
The Biot-Savart law for the magnetic field has certain similarities as
well as differences with the Coulomb’s law for the electrostatic field. Some
of these are:
(i) Both are long range, since both depend inversely on the square of
distance from the source to the point of interest. The principle of
superposition applies to both fields. [In this connection, note that
the magnetic field is linear in the source I dl just as the electrostatic
field is linear in its source: the electric charge.]
(ii) The electrostatic field is produced by a scalar source, namely, the
electric charge. The magnetic field is produced by a vector source
I dl.
dB =

* The sense of dl×r is also given by the Right Hand Screw rule : Look at the plane
containing vectors dl and r. Imagine moving from the first vector towards second
vector. If the movement is anticlockwise, the resultant is towards you. If it is
clockwise, the resultant is away from you.

143

Physics
(iii) The electrostatic field is along the displacement vector joining the
source and the field point. The magnetic field is perpendicular to the
plane containing the displacement vector r and the current element
I dl.
(iv) There is an angle dependence in the Biot-Savart law which is not
present in the electrostatic case. In Fig. 4.9, the magnetic field at any
point in the direction of dl (the dashed line) is zero. Along this line,
θ = 0, sin θ = 0 and from Eq. [4.11(a)], |dB| = 0.
There is an interesting relation between ε0, the permittivity of free
space; µ , the permeability of free space; and c, the speed of light in
vacuum:
0

1
1
1 
µ 
ε 0 µ0 = ( 4 πε 0 )  0  = 
= 2
10 −7 =
8 2
 4π 
 9 × 109 
(3 × 10 )
c

(

)

We will discuss this connection further in Chapter 8 on the
electromagnetic waves. Since the speed of light in vacuum is constant,
the product µ0ε0 is fixed in magnitude. Choosing the value of either ε0 or
µ0, fixes the value of the other. In SI units, µ0 is fixed to be equal to
4π × 10–7 in magnitude.
Example 4.5 An element ∆ l = ∆x ˆi is placed at the origin and carries
a large current I = 10 A (Fig. 4.10). What is the magnetic field on the
y-axis at a distance of 0.5 m. ∆x = 1 cm.

FIGURE 4.10

Solution
|dB | =

µ0 I dl sin θ
[using Eq. (4.11)]
4π
r2

dl = ∆x = 10 −2 m , I = 10 A, r = 0.5 m = y, µ0 / 4 π = 10 −7

Tm
A

θ = 90° ; sin θ = 1
10 −7 × 10 × 10 −2
= 4 × 10–8 T
25 × 10 −2
The direction of the field is in the +z-direction. This is so since,

144

EXAMPLE 4.5

dB =

(

)

ˆ
dl × r = ∆x ˆi × y ˆj = y ∆x ˆi × ˆj = y ∆x k

We remind you of the following cyclic property of cross-products,
ˆi × ˆj = k
ˆ ; ˆj × k
ˆ = ˆi ; k
ˆ × ˆi = ˆj

Note that the field is small in magnitude.

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
In the next section, we shall use the Biot-Savart law to calculate the
magnetic field due to a circular loop.

4.6 MAGNETIC FIELD
CURRENT LOOP

ON THE

AXIS

OF A

CIRCULAR

In this section, we shall evaluate the magnetic field due to a circular coil
along its axis. The evaluation entails summing up the effect of infinitesimal
current elements (I dl) mentioned in the previous section.
We assume that the current I is steady and that the
evaluation is carried out in free space (i.e., vacuum).
Figure 4.11 depicts a circular loop carrying a steady
current I. The loop is placed in the y-z plane with its
centre at the origin O and has a radius R. The x-axis is
the axis of the loop. We wish to calculate the magnetic
field at the point P on this axis. Let x be the distance of
P from the centre O of the loop.
Consider a conducting element dl of the loop. This is
shown in Fig. 4.11. The magnitude dB of the magnetic
field due to dl is given by the Biot-Savart law [Eq. 4.11(a)],

µ 0 I dl × r
(4.12)
4π
r3
Now r 2 = x 2 + R 2 . Further, any element of the loop
will be perpendicular to the displacement vector from
the element to the axial point. For example, the element
dl in Fig. 4.11 is in the y-z plane whereas the
displacement vector r from dl to the axial point P is in
the x-y plane. Hence |dl × r|=r dl. Thus,
dB =

dB =

µ0
Idl
2
4ð x + R 2

(

)

FIGURE 4.11 Magnetic field on the
axis of a current carrying circular
loop of radius R. Shown are the
magnetic field dB (due to a line
element dl ) and its
components along and
perpendicular to the axis.

(4.13)

The direction of dB is shown in Fig. 4.11. It is perpendicular to the
plane formed by dl and r. It has an x-component dBx and a component
perpendicular to x-axis, dB⊥. When the components perpendicular to
the x-axis are summed over, they cancel out and we obtain a null result.
For example, the dB⊥ component due to dl is cancelled by the
contribution due to the diametrically opposite dl element, shown in
Fig. 4.11. Thus, only the x-component survives. The net contribution
along x-direction can be obtained by integrating dBx = dB cos θ over the
loop. For Fig. 4.11,

cos θ =

R
( x + R 2 )1/ 2

(4.14)

2

From Eqs. (4.13) and (4.14),

dBx =

µ0 Idl
R
4ð x 2 + R 2

(

)

3/2

145

Physics
The summation of elements dl over the loop yields 2πR, the
circumference of the loop. Thus, the magnetic field at P due to entire
circular loop is
B = Bx ˆi =

µ0 I R 2

ˆi
3/2
(4.15)
2 x 2 + R2
As a special case of the above result, we may obtain the field at the centre
of the loop. Here x = 0, and we obtain,
µ I
B0 = 0 ˆi
(4.16)
2R
The magnetic field lines due to a circular wire form closed loops and
are shown in Fig. 4.12. The direction of the magnetic field is given by
(another) right-hand thumb rule stated below:
Curl the palm of your right hand around the circular wire with the
fingers pointing in the direction of the current. The right-hand thumb
gives the direction of the magnetic field.

(

)

FIGURE 4.12 The magnetic field lines for a current loop. The direction of
the field is given by the right-hand thumb rule described in the text. The
upper side of the loop may be thought of as the north pole and the lower
side as the south pole of a magnet.

146

EXAMPLE 4.6

Example 4.6 A straight wire carrying a current of 12 A is bent into a
semi-circular arc of radius 2.0 cm as shown in Fig. 4.13(a). Consider
the magnetic field B at the centre of the arc. (a) What is the magnetic
field due to the straight segments? (b) In what way the contribution
to B from the semicircle differs from that of a circular loop and in
what way does it resemble? (c) Would your answer be different if the
wire were bent into a semi-circular arc of the same radius but in the
opposite way as shown in Fig. 4.13(b)?

FIGURE 4.13

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

EXAMPLE 4.6

Solution
(a) dl and r for each element of the straight segments are parallel.
Therefore, dl × r = 0. Straight segments do not contribute to
|B|.
(b) For all segments of the semicircular arc, dl × r are all parallel to
each other (into the plane of the paper). All such contributions
add up in magnitude. Hence direction of B for a semicircular arc
is given by the right-hand rule and magnitude is half that of a
circular loop. Thus B is 1.9 × 10–4 T normal to the plane of the
paper going into it.
(c) Same magnitude of B but opposite in direction to that in (b).
Example 4.7 Consider a tightly wound 100 turn coil of radius 10 cm,
carrying a current of 1 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field at the centre of the coil?

B=

µ0 NI 4 π × 10 –7 × 102 × 1
−4
=
= 2π × 10 −4 = 6.28 × 10 T
2R
2 × 10 –1

EXAMPLE 4.7

Solution Since the coil is tightly wound, we may take each circular
element to have the same radius R = 10 cm = 0.1 m. The number of
turns N = 100. The magnitude of the magnetic field is,

4.7 AMPERE’S CIRCUITAL LAW
There is an alternative and appealing way in which the Biot-Savart law
may be expressed. Ampere’s circuital law considers an open surface
with a boundary (Fig. 4.14). The surface has current passing
through it. We consider the boundary to be made up of a number
of small line elements. Consider one such element of length dl. We
take the value of the tangential component of the magnetic field,
Bt, at this element and multiply it by the length of that element dl
[Note: Btdl=B.d l]. All such products are added together. We
consider the limit as the lengths of elements get smaller and their
number gets larger. The sum then tends to an integral. Ampere’s
law states that this integral is equal to µ0 times the total current
FIGURE 4.14
passing through the surface, i.e.,

Ñ∫ Bgdl = µ

0

I

[4.17(a)]

where I is the total current through the surface. The integral is taken
over the closed loop coinciding with the boundary C of the surface. The
relation above involves a sign-convention, given by the right-hand rule.
Let the fingers of the right-hand be curled in the sense the boundary is
traversed in the loop integral “B.dl. Then the direction of the thumb
gives the sense in which the current I is regarded as positive.
For several applications, a much simplified version of Eq. [4.17(a)]
proves sufficient. We shall assume that, in such cases, it is possible to
choose the loop (called an amperian loop) such that at each point of the
loop, either

147

Physics
(i)

B is tangential to the loop and is a non-zero constant
B, or

(ii) B is normal to the loop, or
(iii) B vanishes.
Now, let L be the length (part) of the loop for which B
is tangential. Let Ie be the current enclosed by the loop.
Then, Eq. (4.17) reduces to,

ANDRE AMPERE (1775 –1836)

BL =µ0Ie

148

Andre Ampere (1775 –
1836) Andre Marie Ampere
was a French physicist,
mathematician
and
chemist who founded the
science of electrodynamics.
Ampere was a child prodigy
who mastered advanced
mathematics by the age of
12. Ampere grasped the
significance of Oersted’s
discovery. He carried out a
large series of experiments
to explore the relationship
between current electricity
and magnetism. These
investigations culminated
in
1827
with
the
publication
of
the
‘Mathematical Theory of
Electrodynamic Phenomena Deduced Solely from
Experiments’. He hypothesised that all magnetic
phenomena are due to
circulating
electric
currents. Ampere was
humble
and
absentminded. He once forgot an
invitation to dine with the
Emperor Napoleon. He died
of pneumonia at the age of
61. His gravestone bears
the epitaph: Tandem Felix
(Happy at last).

[4.17(b)]

When there is a system with a symmetry such as for
a straight infinite current-carrying wire in Fig. 4.15, the
Ampere’s law enables an easy evaluation of the magnetic
field, much the same way Gauss’ law helps in
determination of the electric field. This is exhibited in the
Example 4.8 below. The boundary of the loop chosen is
a circle and magnetic field is tangential to the
circumference of the circle. The law gives, for the left hand
side of Eq. [4.17 (b)], B. 2πr. We find that the magnetic
field at a distance r outside the wire is tangential and
given by
B × 2πr = µ0 I,
B = µ0 I/ (2πr)

(4.18)

The above result for the infinite wire is interesting
from several points of view.
(i) It implies that the field at every point on a circle of
radius r, (with the wire along the axis), is same in
magnitude. In other words, the magnetic field
possesses what is called a cylindrical symmetry. The
field that normally can depend on three coordinates
depends only on one: r. Whenever there is symmetry,
the solutions simplify.
(ii) The field direction at any point on this circle is
tangential to it. Thus, the lines of constant magnitude
of magnetic field form concentric circles. Notice now,
in Fig. 4.1(c), the iron filings form concentric circles.
These lines called magnetic field lines form closed
loops. This is unlike the electrostatic field lines which
originate from positive charges and end at negative
charges. The expression for the magnetic field of a
straight wire provides a theoretical justification to
Oersted’s experiments.
(iii) Another interesting point to note is that even though
the wire is infinite, the field due to it at a nonzero
distance is not infinite. It tends to blow up only when
we come very close to the wire. The field is directly
proportional to the current and inversely proportional
to the distance from the (infinitely long) current
source.

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
(iv) There exists a simple rule to determine the direction of the magnetic
field due to a long wire. This rule, called the right-hand rule*, is:
Grasp the wire in your right hand with your extended thumb pointing
in the direction of the current. Your fingers will curl around in the
direction of the magnetic field.
Ampere’s circuital law is not new in content from Biot-Savart law.
Both relate the magnetic field and the current, and both express the same
physical consequences of a steady electrical current. Ampere’s law is to
Biot-Savart law, what Gauss’s law is to Coulomb’s law. Both, Ampere’s
and Gauss’s law relate a physical quantity on the periphery or boundary
(magnetic or electric field) to another physical quantity, namely, the source,
in the interior (current or charge). We also note that Ampere’s circuital
law holds for steady currents which do not fluctuate with time. The
following example will help us understand what is meant by the term
enclosed current.
Example 4.8 Figure 4.15 shows a long straight wire of a circular
cross-section (radius a) carrying steady current I. The current I is
uniformly distributed across this cross-section. Calculate the
magnetic field in the region r < a and r > a.

FIGURE 4.15

Solution (a) Consider the case r > a . The Amperian loop, labelled 2,
is a circle concentric with the cross-section. For this loop,
L =2πr
Ie = Current enclosed by the loop = I
The result is the familiar expression for a long straight wire
B (2π r) = µ0I
B=

µ0 I
2ðr

[4.19(a)]

L =2πr

* Note that there are two distinct right-hand rules: One which gives the direction
of B on the axis of current-loop and the other which gives direction of B
for a straight conducting wire. Fingers and thumb play different roles in
the two.

EXAMPLE 4.8

1
(r > a)
r
(b) Consider the case r < a. The Amperian loop is a circle labelled 1.
For this loop, taking the radius of the circle to be r,
B∝

149

Physics
Now the current enclosed Ie is not I, but is less than this value.
Since the current distribution is uniform, the current enclosed is,
 πr 2 
Ir 2
Ie = I 
2 =
 πa 
a2

Using Ampere’s law, B (2 ð r ) = µ0

I r2
a2

 µ I 
B =  0 2r
 2 ða 

B∝r

[4.19(b)]

(r < a)

EXAMPLE 4.8

FIGURE 4.16

Figure (4.16) shows a plot of the magnitude of B with distance r
from the centre of the wire. The direction of the field is tangential to
the respective circular loop (1 or 2) and given by the right-hand
rule described earlier in this section.
This example possesses the required symmetry so that Ampere’s
law can be applied readily.
It should be noted that while Ampere’s circuital law holds for any
loop, it may not always facilitate an evaluation of the magnetic field in
every case. For example, for the case of the circular loop discussed in
Section 4.6, it cannot be applied to extract the simple expression
B = µ0I/2R [Eq. (4.16)] for the field at the centre of the loop. However,
there exists a large number of situations of high symmetry where the law
can be conveniently applied. We shall use it in the next section to calculate
the magnetic field produced by two commonly used and very useful
magnetic systems: the solenoid and the toroid.

4.8 THE SOLENOID

150

AND THE

TOROID

The solenoid and the toroid are two pieces of equipment which generate
magnetic fields. The television uses the solenoid to generate magnetic
fields needed. The synchrotron uses a combination of both to generate
the high magnetic fields required. In both, solenoid and toroid, we come
across a situation of high symmetry where Ampere’s law can be
conveniently applied.

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
4.8.1 The solenoid
We shall discuss a long solenoid. By long solenoid we mean that the
solenoid’s length is large compared to its radius. It consists of a long
wire wound in the form of a helix where the neighbouring turns are closely
spaced. So each turn can be regarded as a circular loop. The net magnetic
field is the vector sum of the fields due to all the turns. Enamelled wires
are used for winding so that turns are insulated from each other.

FIGURE 4.17 (a) The magnetic field due to a section of the solenoid which has been
stretched out for clarity. Only the exterior semi-circular part is shown. Notice
how the circular loops between neighbouring turns tend to cancel.
(b) The magnetic field of a finite solenoid.

Figure 4.17 displays the magnetic field lines for a finite solenoid. We
show a section of this solenoid in an enlarged manner in Fig. 4.17(a).
Figure 4.17(b) shows the entire finite solenoid with its magnetic field. In
Fig. 4.17(a), it is clear from the circular loops that the field between two
neighbouring turns vanishes. In Fig. 4.17(b), we see that the field at the
interior mid-point P is uniform, strong and along the axis of the solenoid.
The field at the exterior mid-point Q is weak and moreover is along the
axis of the solenoid with no perpendicular or normal component. As the
solenoid is made longer it appears like a long cylindrical metal sheet.
Figure 4.18 represents this idealised picture. The field outside the solenoid
approaches zero. We shall assume that the field outside is zero. The field
inside becomes everywhere parallel to the axis.

FIGURE 4.18 The magnetic field of a very long solenoid. We consider a
rectangular Amperian loop abcd to determine the field.

151

Physics
Consider a rectangular Amperian loop abcd. Along cd the field is zero
as argued above. Along transverse sections bc and ad, the field component
is zero. Thus, these two sections make no contribution. Let the field along
ab be B. Thus, the relevant length of the Amperian loop is, L = h.
Let n be the number of turns per unit length, then the total number
of turns is nh. The enclosed current is, Ie = I (n h), where I is the current
in the solenoid. From Ampere’s circuital law [Eq. 4.17 (b)]
BL = µ0Ie,
B = µ0 n I

B h = µ0I (n h)
(4.20)

The direction of the field is given by the right-hand rule. The solenoid
is commonly used to obtain a uniform magnetic field. We shall see in the
next chapter that a large field is possible by inserting a soft
iron core inside the solenoid.

4.8.2 The toroid
The toroid is a hollow circular ring on which a large number
of turns of a wire are closely wound. It can be viewed as a
solenoid which has been bent into a circular shape to close
on itself. It is shown in Fig. 4.19(a) carrying a current I. We
shall see that the magnetic field in the open space inside
(point P) and exterior to the toroid (point Q) is zero. The
field B inside the toroid is constant in magnitude for the
ideal toroid of closely wound turns.
Figure 4.19(b) shows a sectional view of the toroid. The
direction of the magnetic field inside is clockwise as per the
right-hand thumb rule for circular loops. Three circular
Amperian loops 1, 2 and 3 are shown by dashed lines. By
symmetry, the magnetic field should be tangential to each
of them and constant in magnitude for a given loop. The
circular areas bounded by loops 2 and 3 both cut the toroid:
so that each turn of current carrying wire is cut once by
the loop 2 and twice by the loop 3.
Let the magnetic field along loop 1 be B1 in magnitude.
Then in Ampere’s circuital law [Eq. 4.17(a)], L = 2π r1.
However, the loop encloses no current, so Ie = 0. Thus,
FIGURE 4.19 (a) A toroid carrying
a current I. (b) A sectional view of
the toroid. The magnetic field can
be obtained at an arbitrary
distance r from the centre O of
the toroid by Ampere’s circuital
law. The dashed lines labelled
1, 2 and 3 are three circular
Amperian loops.

152

B1 (2 π r1) = µ0(0),

B1 = 0

Thus, the magnetic field at any point P in the open space
inside the toroid is zero.
We shall now show that magnetic field at Q is likewise
zero. Let the magnetic field along loop 3 be B3. Once again
from Ampere’s law L = 2 π r3. However, from the sectional
cut, we see that the current coming out of the plane of the
paper is cancelled exactly by the current going into it. Thus,
Ie= 0, and B3 = 0. Let the magnetic field inside the solenoid
be B. We shall now consider the magnetic field at S. Once again we employ
Ampere’s law in the form of Eq. [4.17 (a)]. We find, L = 2π r.
The current enclosed Ie is (for N turns of toroidal coil) N I.
B (2πr) = µ0NI

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
µ0 NI
(4.21)
2πr
We shall now compare the two results: for a toroid and solenoid. We
re-express Eq. (4.21) to make the comparison easier with the solenoid
result given in Eq. (4.20). Let r be the average radius of the toroid and n
be the number of turns per unit length. Then
N = 2πr n = (average) perimeter of the toroid
× number of turns per unit length
and thus,
(4.22)
B = µ0 n I,
i.e., the result for the solenoid!
In an ideal toroid the coils are circular. In reality the turns of the
toroidal coil form a helix and there is always a small magnetic field external
to the toroid.
B=

MAGNETIC

CONFINEMENT

We have seen in Section 4.3 (see also the box on helical motion of charged particles earlier
in this chapter) that orbits of charged particles are helical. If the magnetic field is
non-uniform, but does not change much during one circular orbit, then the radius of the
helix will decrease as it enters stronger magnetic field and the radius will increase when it
enters weaker magnetic fields. We consider two solenoids at a distance from each other,
enclosed in an evacuated container (see figure below where we have not shown the container).
Charged particles moving in the region between the two solenoids will start with a small
radius. The radius will increase as field decreases and the radius will decrease again as
field due to the second solenoid takes over. The solenoids act as a mirror or reflector. [See
the direction of F as the particle approaches coil 2 in the figure. It has a horizontal component
against the forward motion.] This makes the particles turn back when they approach the
solenoid. Such an arrangement will act like magnetic bottle or magnetic container. The
particles will never touch the sides of the container. Such magnetic bottles are of great use
in confining the high energy plasma in fusion experiments. The plasma will destroy any
other form of material container because of it’s high temperature. Another useful container
is a toroid. Toroids are expected to play a key role in the tokamak, an equipment for plasma
confinement in fusion power reactors. There is an international collaboration called the
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER), being set up in France, for
achieving controlled fusion, of which India is a collaborating nation. For details of ITER
collaboration and the project, you may visit http://www.iter.org.

153

Physics
Example 4.9 A solenoid of length 0.5 m has a radius of 1 cm and is
made up of 500 turns. It carries a current of 5 A. What is the
magnitude of the magnetic field inside the solenoid?
Solution The number of turns per unit length is,
500
= 1000 turns/m
0.5
The length l = 0.5 m and radius r = 0.01 m. Thus, l/a = 50 i.e., l >> a .
Hence, we can use the long solenoid formula, namely, Eq. (4.20)
B = µ0n I
= 4π × 10–7 × 103 × 5
= 6.28 × 10–3 T

EXAMPLE 4.9

n =

4.9 FORCE BETWEEN TWO PARALLEL CURRENTS,
THE AMPERE
We have learnt that there exists a magnetic field due to a conductor
carrying a current which obeys the Biot-Savart law. Further, we have
learnt that an external magnetic field will exert a force on
a current-carrying conductor. This follows from the
Lorentz force formula. Thus, it is logical to expect that
two current-carrying conductors placed near each other
will exert (magnetic) forces on each other. In the period
1820-25, Ampere studied the nature of this magnetic
force and its dependence on the magnitude of the current,
on the shape and size of the conductors as well as the
distances between the conductors. In this section, we
shall take the simple example of two parallel currentcarrying conductors, which will perhaps help us to
appreciate Ampere’s painstaking work.
Figure 4.20 shows two long parallel conductors a
FIGURE 4.20 Two long straight
and
b separated by a distance d and carrying (parallel)
parallel conductors carrying steady
currents I a and I b, respectively. The conductor ‘a’
currents Ia and Ib and separated by a
distance d. Ba is the magnetic field set produces, the same magnetic field Ba at all points along
up by conductor ‘a’ at conductor ‘b’.
the conductor ‘b’. The right-hand rule tells us that the
direction of this field is downwards (when the conductors
are placed horizontally). Its magnitude is given by Eq. [4.19(a)] or from
Ampere’s circuital law,
Ba =

154

µ0 I a
2πd

The conductor ‘b’ carrying a current Ib will experience a sideways
force due to the field Ba. The direction of this force is towards the
conductor ‘a’ (Verify this). We label this force as Fba, the force on a
segment L of ‘b’ due to ‘a’. The magnitude of this force is given by
Eq. (4.4),

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
Fba = Ib L Ba
=

µ0 I a I b
L
2πd

(4.23)

It is of course possible to compute the force on ‘a’ due to ‘b’. From
considerations similar to above we can find the force Fab, on a segment of
length L of ‘a’ due to the current in ‘b’. It is equal in magnitude to Fba,
and directed towards ‘b’. Thus,
Fba = –Fab

(4.24)

Note that this is consistent with Newton’s third Law. Thus, at least for
parallel conductors and steady currents, we have shown that the
Biot-Savart law and the Lorentz force yield results in accordance with
Newton’s third Law*.
We have seen from above that currents flowing in the same direction
attract each other. One can show that oppositely directed currents repel
each other. Thus,
Parallel currents attract, and antiparallel currents repel.
This rule is the opposite of what we find in electrostatics. Like (same
sign) charges repel each other, but like (parallel) currents attract each
other.
Let fba represent the magnitude of the force Fba per unit length. Then,
from Eq. (4.23),
f ba =

µ0 I a I b
2ðd

(4.25)

The above expression is used to define the ampere (A), which is one
of the seven SI base units.
The ampere is the value of that steady current which, when maintained
in each of the two very long, straight, parallel conductors of negligible
cross-section, and placed one metre apart in vacuum, would produce
on each of these conductors a force equal to 2 × 10–7 newtons per metre
of length.
This definition of the ampere was adopted in 1946. It is a theoretical
definition. In practice one must eliminate the effect of the earth’s magnetic
field and substitute very long wires by multiturn coils of appropriate
geometries. An instrument called the current balance is used to measure
this mechanical force.
The SI unit of charge, namely, the coulomb, can now be defined in
terms of the ampere.
When a steady current of 1A is set up in a conductor, the quantity of
charge that flows through its cross-section in 1s is one coulomb (1C).
* It turns out that when we have time-dependent currents and/or charges in
motion, Newton’s third law may not hold for forces between charges and/or
conductors. An essential consequence of the Newton’s third law in mechanics
is conservation of momentum of an isolated system. This, however, holds even
for the case of time-dependent situations with electromagnetic fields, provided
the momentum carried by fields is also taken into account.

155

Physics
ROGET’S

SPIRAL FOR ATTRACTION BETWEEN PARALLEL CURRENTS

Magnetic effects are generally smaller than electric effects. As a consequence, the force
between currents is rather small, because of the smallness of the factor µ. Hence it is
difficult to demonstrate attraction or repulsion between currents. Thus for 5 A current
in each wire at a separation of 1cm, the force per metre would be 5 × 10–4 N, which is
about 50 mg weight. It would be like pulling a wire by a string going over a pulley to
which a 50 mg weight is attached. The displacement of the wire would be quite
unnoticeable.
With the use of a soft spring, we can increase the effective length of the parallel current
and by using mercury, we can make the displacement of even a few mm observable very
dramatically. You will also need a constant-current
supply giving a constant current of about 5 A.
Take a soft spring whose natural period of
oscillations is about 0.5 – 1s. Hang it vertically and
attach a pointed tip to its lower end, as shown in the
figure here. Take some mercury in a dish and adjust the
spring such that the tip is just above the mercury
surface. Take the DC current source, connect one of its
terminals to the upper end of the spring, and dip the
other terminal in mercury. If the tip of the spring touches
mercury, the circuit is completed through mercury.
Let the DC source be put off to begin with. Let the tip be adjusted so that it just
touches the mercury surface. Switch on the constant current supply, and watch the
fascinating outcome. The spring shrinks with a jerk, the tip comes out of mercury (just
by a mm or so), the circuit is broken, the current stops, the spring relaxes and tries to
come back to its original position, the tip again touches mercury establishing a current
in the circuit, and the cycle continues with tick, tick, tick, . . . . In the beginning, you
may require some small adjustments to get a good effect.
Keep your face away from mercury vapours as they are poisonous. Do not inhale
mercury vapours for long.

156

EXAMPLE 4.10

Example 4.10 The horizontal component of the earth’s magnetic field
at a certain place is 3.0 ×10–5 T and the direction of the field is from
the geographic south to the geographic north. A very long straight
conductor is carrying a steady current of 1A. What is the force per
unit length on it when it is placed on a horizontal table and the
direction of the current is (a) east to west; (b) south to north?
Solution F = I l × B
F = IlB sinθ
The force per unit length is
f = F/l = I B sinθ
(a) When the current is flowing from east to west,
θ = 90°
Hence,
f=IB
= 1 × 3 × 10–5 = 3 × 10–5 N m–1

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

4.10 TORQUE

ON

EXAMPLE 4.10

This is larger than the value 2×10–7 Nm–1 quoted in the definition
of the ampere. Hence it is important to eliminate the effect of the
earth’s magnetic field and other stray fields while standardising
the ampere.
The direction of the force is downwards. This direction may be
obtained by the directional property of cross product of vectors.
(b) When the current is flowing from south to north,
θ = 0o
f=0
Hence there is no force on the conductor.

CURRENT LOOP, MAGNETIC DIPOLE

4.10.1 Torque on a rectangular current loop in a uniform
magnetic field
We now show that a rectangular loop carrying a steady current I and
placed in a uniform magnetic field experiences a torque. It does not
experience a net force. This behaviour is analogous to
that of electric dipole in a uniform electric field
(Section 1.10).
We first consider the simple case when the
rectangular loop is placed such that the uniform
magnetic field B is in the plane of the loop. This is
illustrated in Fig. 4.21(a).
The field exerts no force on the two arms AD and BC
of the loop. It is perpendicular to the arm AB of the loop
and exerts a force F1 on it which is directed into the
plane of the loop. Its magnitude is,
F1 = I b B
Similarly it exerts a force F2 on the arm CD and F2
is directed out of the plane of the paper.
F2 = I b B = F1
Thus, the net force on the loop is zero. There is a
torque on the loop due to the pair of forces F1 and F2.
Figure 4.21(b) shows a view of the loop from the AD
end. It shows that the torque on the loop tends to rotate
it anti-clockwise. This torque is (in magnitude),

τ = F1

a
a
+ F2
2
2

a
a
+ IbB = I (ab ) B
2
2
=IAB
= IbB

(4.26)

where A = ab is the area of the rectangle.
We next consider the case when the plane of the loop,
is not along the magnetic field, but makes an angle with
it. We take the angle between the field and the normal to

FIGURE 4.21 (a) A rectangular
current-carrying coil in uniform
magnetic field. The magnetic moment
m points downwards. The torque τ is
along the axis and tends to rotate the
coil anticlockwise. (b) The couple
acting on the coil.

157

Physics
the coil to be angle θ (The previous case
corresponds to θ = π/2). Figure 4.22 illustrates
this general case.
The forces on the arms BC and DA are equal,
opposite, and act along the axis of the coil, which
connects the centres of mass of BC and DA. Being
collinear along the axis they cancel each other,
resulting in no net force or torque. The forces on
arms AB and CD are F1 and F2. They too are equal
and opposite, with magnitude,
F1 = F2 = I b B
But they are not collinear! This results in a
couple as before. The torque is, however, less than
the earlier case when plane of loop was along the
magnetic field. This is because the perpendicular
distance between the forces of the couple has
decreased. Figure 4.22(b) is a view of the
arrangement from the AD end and it illustrates
these two forces constituting a couple. The
magnitude of the torque on the loop is,

τ = F1
FIGURE 4.22 (a) The area vector of the loop
ABCD makes an arbitrary angle θ with
the magnetic field. (b) Top view of
the loop. The forces F1 and F2 acting
on the arms AB and CD
are indicated.

a
a
sin θ + F2 sin θ
2
2

= I ab B sin θ
= I A B sin θ

(4.27)

As θ à 0, the perpendicular distance between
the forces of the couple also approaches zero. This
makes the forces collinear and the net force and
torque zero. The torques in Eqs. (4.26) and (4.27)
can be expressed as vector product of the magnetic moment of the coil
and the magnetic field. We define the magnetic moment of the current
loop as,
m=IA
(4.28)
where the direction of the area vector A is given by the right-hand thumb
rule and is directed into the plane of the paper in Fig. 4.21. Then as the
angle between m and B is θ , Eqs. (4.26) and (4.27) can be expressed by
one expression
τ =m×B

(4.29)

This is analogous to the electrostatic case (Electric dipole of dipole
moment pe in an electric field E).
τ = pe × E

158

As is clear from Eq. (4.28), the dimensions of the magnetic moment are
[A][L2] and its unit is Am2.
From Eq. (4.29), we see that the torque τ vanishes when m is either
parallel or antiparallel to the magnetic field B. This indicates a state of
equilibrium as there is no torque on the coil (this also applies to any
object with a magnetic moment m). When m and B are parallel the

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
equilibrium is a stable one. Any small rotation of the coil produces a
torque which brings it back to its original position. When they are
antiparallel, the equilibrium is unstable as any rotation produces a torque
which increases with the amount of rotation. The presence of this torque
is also the reason why a small magnet or any magnetic dipole aligns
itself with the external magnetic field.
If the loop has N closely wound turns, the expression for torque, Eq.
(4.29), still holds, with
m=NIA

(4.30)

Example 4.11 A 100 turn closely wound circular coil of radius 10 cm
carries a current of 3.2 A. (a) What is the field at the centre of the
coil? (b) What is the magnetic moment of this coil?
The coil is placed in a vertical plane and is free to rotate about a
horizontal axis which coincides with its diameter. A uniform magnetic
field of 2T in the horizontal direction exists such that initially the
axis of the coil is in the direction of the field. The coil rotates through
an angle of 90º under the influence of the magnetic field.
(c) What are the magnitudes of the torques on the coil in the initial
and final position? (d) What is the angular speed acquired by the
coil when it has rotated by 90º? The moment of inertia of the coil is
0.1 kg m2.
Solution
(a) From Eq. (4.16)

µ0 NI
2R
Here, N = 100; I = 3.2 A, and R = 0.1 m. Hence,
B=

4 π × 10 −7 × 102 × 3.2
4 × 10 −5 × 10
=
(using π × 3.2 = 10)
2 × 10 −1
2 × 10 −1
= 2 × 10–3 T
The direction is given by the right-hand thumb rule.
(b) The magnetic moment is given by Eq. (4.30),
B=

m = N I A = N I π r2 = 100 × 3.2 × 3.14 × 10–2 = 10 A m2
The direction is once again given by the right hand thumb rule.
(c) τ = m × B

[from Eq. (4.29)]

= m B sin θ
Initially, θ = 0. Thus, initial torque τi = 0. Finally, θ = π/2 (or 90º).
Thus, final torque τf = m B = 10 × 2 = 20 N m.
(d) From Newton’s second law,

dω
= m B sin θ
dt
where 1 is the moment of inertia of the coil. From chain rule,

1

1 ω dω = m B sin θ dθ

EXAMPLE 4.11

d ω dω dθ d ω
=
=
ω
dt
dθ dt
dθ
Using this,

159

Physics
Integrating from θ = 0 to θ = π/2,
ωf

EXAMPLE 4.11

1

∫

ω dω = m B

0

1

ð/2

∫

sin θ d θ

0

ω 2f
2

= −m B cos θ

 2m B 
ωf = 
 1 

1/ 2

π/2
0

=mB

 2 × 20 
=
 10−1 

1/ 2

= 20 s–1.

EXAMPLE 4.12

Example 4.12
(a) A current-carrying circular loop lies on a smooth horizontal plane.
Can a uniform magnetic field be set up in such a manner that
the loop turns around itself (i.e., turns about the vertical axis).
(b) A current-carrying circular loop is located in a uniform external
magnetic field. If the loop is free to turn, what is its orientation
of stable equilibrium? Show that in this orientation, the flux of
the total field (external field + field produced by the loop) is
maximum.
(c) A loop of irregular shape carrying current is located in an external
magnetic field. If the wire is flexible, why does it change to a
circular shape?
Solution
(a) No, because that would require τ to be in the vertical direction.
But τ = I A × B, and since A of the horizontal loop is in the vertical
direction, τ would be in the plane of the loop for any B.
(b) Orientation of stable equilibrium is one where the area vector A
of the loop is in the direction of external magnetic field. In this
orientation, the magnetic field produced by the loop is in the same
direction as external field, both normal to the plane of the loop,
thus giving rise to maximum flux of the total field.
(c) It assumes circular shape with its plane normal to the field to
maximize flux, since for a given perimeter, a circle encloses greater
area than any other shape.

4.10.2 Circular current loop as a magnetic dipole
In this section, we shall consider the elementary magnetic element: the
current loop. We shall show that the magnetic field (at large distances)
due to current in a circular current loop is very similar in behavior to the
electric field of an electric dipole. In Section 4.6, we have evaluated the
magnetic field on the axis of a circular loop, of a radius R, carrying a
steady current I. The magnitude of this field is [(Eq. (4.15)],
B=

160

(

µ0 I R 2

2 x 2 + R2

)

3/2

and its direction is along the axis and given by the right-hand thumb
rule (Fig. 4.12). Here, x is the distance along the axis from the centre of
the loop. For x >> R, we may drop the R 2 term in the denominator. Thus,

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
µ0 R 2
2x 3
Note that the area of the loop A = πR2. Thus,
B=

µ0 IA
2 πx 3
As earlier, we define the magnetic moment m to have a magnitude IA,
m = I A. Hence,
B=

B;

µ0 m
2ð x3

µ0 2 m
[4.31(a)]
4ð x 3
The expression of Eq. [4.31(a)] is very similar to an expression obtained
earlier for the electric field of a dipole. The similarity may be seen if we
substitute,
=

µ0 → 1/ ε 0
m → pe (electrostatic dipole)
B → E (electrostatic field)
We then obtain,

E=

2 pe
4 π ε0 x 3

which is precisely the field for an electric dipole at a point on its axis.
considered in Chapter 1, Section 1.10 [Eq. (1.20)].
It can be shown that the above analogy can be carried further. We
had found in Chapter 1 that the electric field on the perpendicular bisector
of the dipole is given by [See Eq.(1.21)],
E;

pe
4 πε 0 x 3

where x is the distance from the dipole. If we replace p à m and µ0 → 1/ ε 0
in the above expression, we obtain the result for B for a point in the
plane of the loop at a distance x from the centre. For x >>R,
µ m
x >> R
B; 0 3;
[4.31(b)]
4π x
The results given by Eqs. [4.31(a)] and [4.31(b)] become exact for a
point magnetic dipole.
The results obtained above can be shown to apply to any planar loop:
a planar current loop is equivalent to a magnetic dipole of dipole moment
m = I A, which is the analogue of electric dipole moment p. Note, however,
a fundamental difference: an electric dipole is built up of two elementary
units — the charges (or electric monopoles). In magnetism, a magnetic
dipole (or a current loop) is the most elementary element. The equivalent
of electric charges, i.e., magnetic monopoles, are not known to exist.
We have shown that a current loop (i) produces a magnetic field (see
Fig. 4.12) and behaves like a magnetic dipole at large distances, and

161

Physics
(ii) is subject to torque like a magnetic needle. This led Ampere to suggest
that all magnetism is due to circulating currents. This seems to be partly
true and no magnetic monopoles have been seen so far. However,
elementary particles such as an electron or a proton also carry an intrinsic
magnetic moment, not accounted by circulating currents.

4.10.3 The magnetic dipole moment of a revolving electron
In Chapter 12 we shall read about the Bohr model of the hydrogen atom.
You may perhaps have heard of this model which was proposed by the
Danish physicist Niels Bohr in 1911 and was a stepping stone
to a new kind of mechanics, namely, quantum mechanics.
In the Bohr model, the electron (a negatively charged particle)
revolves around a positively charged nucleus much as a
planet revolves around the sun. The force in the former case
is electrostatic (Coulomb force) while it is gravitational for
the planet-Sun case. We show this Bohr picture of the electron
in Fig. 4.23.
The electron of charge (–e) (e = + 1.6 × 10–19 C) performs
uniform circular motion around a stationary heavy nucleus
of charge +Ze. This constitutes a current I, where,
FIGURE 4.23 In the Bohr model
of hydrogen-like atoms, the
negatively charged electron is
revolving with uniform speed
around a centrally placed
positively charged (+Z e)
nucleus. The uniform circular
motion of the electron
constitutes a current. The
direction of the magnetic
moment is into the plane of the
paper and is indicated
separately by ⊗.

e
(4.32)
T
and T is the time period of revolution. Let r be the orbital
radius of the electron, and v the orbital speed. Then,
I =

2 ðr
(4.33)
v
Substituting in Eq. (4.32), we have I = ev/2πr.
There will be a magnetic moment, usually denoted by µl,
associated with this circulating current. From Eq. (4.28) its
magnitude is, µl = Iπr2 = evr/2.
The direction of this magnetic moment is into the plane
of the paper in Fig. 4.23. [This follows from the right-hand
rule discussed earlier and the fact that the negatively charged
electron is moving anti-clockwise, leading to a clockwise current.]
Multiplying and dividing the right-hand side of the above expression by
the electron mass me, we have,

µl =
=

T =

e
(m e v r )
2m e
e
l
2m e

[4.34(a)]

Here, l is the magnitude of the angular momentum of the electron
about the central nucleus (“orbital” angular momentum). Vectorially,
e
l
[4.34(b)]
2m e
The negative sign indicates that the angular momentum of the electron
is opposite in direction to the magnetic moment. Instead of electron with

µl = −

162

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
charge (– e), if we had taken a particle with charge (+q), the angular
momentum and magnetic moment would be in the same direction. The
ratio

µl
e
=
2m e
l

(4.35)

nh
2π

(4.36)

where n is a natural number, n = 1, 2, 3, .... and h is a constant named
after Max Planck (Planck’s constant) with a value h = 6.626 × 10–34 J s.
This condition of discreteness is called the Bohr quantisation condition.
We shall discuss it in detail in Chapter 12. Our aim here is merely to use
it to calculate the elementary dipole moment. Take the value n = 1, we
have from Eq. (4.34) that,
( µl )min =
=

e
h
4 π me
1.60 × 10 −19 × 6.63 × 10 −34
4 × 3.14 × 9.11 × 10 −31

= 9.27 × 10–24 Am2
(4.37)
where the subscript ‘min’ stands for minimum. This value is called the
Bohr magneton.
Any charge in uniform circular motion would have an associated
magnetic moment given by an expression similar to Eq. (4.34). This dipole
moment is labelled as the orbital magnetic moment. Hence the subscript
‘l’ in µl. Besides the orbital moment, the electron has an intrinsic magnetic
moment, which has the same numerical value as given in Eq. (4.37). It is
called the spin magnetic moment. But we hasten to add that it is not as
though the electron is spinning. The electron is an elementary particle
and it does not have an axis to spin around like a top or our earth.
Nevertheless it does possess this intrinsic magnetic moment. The
microscopic roots of magnetism in iron and other materials can be traced
back to this intrinsic spin magnetic moment.

Conversion of galvanometer into ameter and voltmeter:

l =

http://patsy.hunter.cuny.edu/CORE/CORE4/LectureNotes/Electricity/electric6.htm

is called the gyromagnetic ratio and is a constant. Its value is 8.8 × 1010 C /kg
for an electron, which has been verified by experiments.
The fact that even at an atomic level there is a magnetic moment,
confirms Ampere’s bold hypothesis of atomic magnetic moments. This
according to Ampere, would help one to explain the magnetic properties
of materials. Can one assign a value to this atomic dipole moment? The
answer is Yes. One can do so within the Bohr model. Bohr hypothesised
that the angular momentum assumes a discrete set of values, namely,

4.11 THE MOVING COIL GALVANOMETER
Currents and voltages in circuits have been discussed extensively in
Chapters 3. But how do we measure them? How do we claim that
current in a circuit is 1.5 A or the voltage drop across a resistor is 1.2 V?
Figure 4.24 exhibits a very useful instrument for this purpose: the moving

163

Physics
coil galvanometer (MCG). It is a device whose principle can be understood
on the basis of our discussion in Section 4.10.
The galvanometer consists of a coil, with many turns, free to rotate
about a fixed axis (Fig. 4.24), in a uniform radial magnetic field. There is
a cylindrical soft iron core which not only makes the field radial but also
increases the strength of the magnetic field. When a current flows through
the coil, a torque acts on it. This torque is given by Eq. (4.26) to be
τ = NI AB
where the symbols have their usual meaning. Since the field is radial by
design, we have taken sin θ = 1 in the above expression for the torque.
The magnetic torque NIAB tends to rotate the coil. A spring Sp provides a
counter torque kφ that balances the magnetic torque NIAB; resulting in a
steady angular deflection φ. In equilibrium
kφ = NI AB
where k is the torsional constant of the spring; i.e. the restoring torque
per unit twist. The deflection φ is indicated on the scale by a pointer
attached to the spring. We have
 NAB 
φ=
I
 k 

FIGURE 4.24 The moving coil
galvanometer. Its elements are
described in the text. Depending on
the requirement, this device can be
used as a current detector or for
measuring the value of the current
(ammeter) or voltage (voltmeter).

164

(4.38)
The quantity in brackets is a constant for a given
galvanometer.
The galvanometer can be used in a number of ways.
It can be used as a detector to check if a current is
flowing in the circuit. We have come across this usage
in the Wheatstone’s bridge arrangement. In this usage
the neutral position of the pointer (when no current is
flowing through the galvanometer) is in the middle of
the scale and not at the left end as shown in Fig.4.24.
Depending on the direction of the current, the pointer
deflection is either to the right or the left.
The galvanometer cannot as such be used as an
ammeter to measure the value of the current in a given
circuit. This is for two reasons: (i) Galvanometer is a
very sensitive device, it gives a full-scale deflection for
a current of the order of µA. (ii) For measuring
currents, the galvanometer has to be connected in
series, and as it has a large resistance, this will change
the value of the current in the circuit. To overcome
these difficulties, one attaches a small resistance rs,
called shunt resistance, in parallel with
the galvanometer coil; so that most of the current
passes through the shunt. The resistance of this
arrangement is,
if RG >> rs
; rs
If rs has small value, in relation to the resistance of
the rest of the circuit Rc, the effect of introducing the
measuring instrument is also small and negligible. This
RG rs / (RG + rs )

Moving Charges and
Magnetism
arrangement is schematically shown in Fig. 4.25. The scale of this
ammeter is calibrated and then graduated to read off the current value
with ease. We define the current sensitivity of the galvanometer as the
deflection per unit current. From Eq. (4.38) this current sensitivity is,

φ NAB
=
(4.39)
I
k
A convenient way for the manufacturer to increase the sensitivity is
to increase the number of turns N. We choose galvanometers having
sensitivities of value, required by our experiment.
The galvanometer can also be used as a voltmeter to measure the
FIGURE 4.25
voltage across a given section of the circuit. For this it must be connected
Conversion of a
in parallel with that section of the circuit. Further, it must draw a very galvanometer (G) to
small current, otherwise the voltage measurement will disturb the original an ammeter by the
introduction of a
set up by an amount which is very large. Usually we like to keep the
disturbance due to the measuring device below one per cent. To ensure shunt resistance rs of
this, a large resistance R is connected in series with the galvanometer. very small value in
parallel.
This arrangement is schematically depicted in Fig.4.26. Note that the
resistance of the voltmeter is now,
RG + R ; R : large
The scale of the voltmeter is calibrated to read off the voltage value
with ease. We define the voltage sensitivity as the deflection per unit
voltage. From Eq. (4.38),

φ  NAB  I
 NAB  1
=
=


V  k V  k R

(4.40)

An interesting point to note is that increasing the current sensitivity
may not necessarily increase the voltage sensitivity. Let us take Eq. (4.39)
which provides a measure of current sensitivity. If N → 2N, i.e., we double
the number of turns, then

FIGURE 4.26
Conversion of a
galvanometer (G) to a
φ
φ
→2
voltmeter by the
I
I
introduction of a
Thus, the current sensitivity doubles. However, the resistance of the resistance R of large
value in series.
galvanometer is also likely to double, since it is proportional to the length

of the wire. In Eq. (4.40), N →2N, and R →2R, thus the voltage sensitivity,

φ
φ
→
V
V
remains unchanged. So in general, the modification needed for conversion
of a galvanometer to an ammeter will be different from what is needed
for converting it into a voltmeter.

EXAMPLE 4.13

Example 4.13 In the circuit (Fig. 4.27) the current is to be
measured. What is the value of the current if the ammeter shown
(a) is a galvanometer with a resistance R G = 60.00 Ω; (b) is a
galvanometer described in (a) but converted to an ammeter by a
shunt resistance r s = 0.02 Ω; (c) is an ideal ammeter with zero
resistance?

165

Physics

FIGURE 4.27

Solution
(a) Total resistance in the circuit is,
RG + 3 = 63 Ω . Hence, I = 3/63 = 0.048 A.
(b) Resistance of the galvanometer converted to an ammeter is,

Total resistance in the circuit is,
0.02 Ω + 3 Ω = 3.02 Ω . Hence, I = 3/3.02 = 0.99 A.
(c) For the ideal ammeter with zero resistance,
I = 3/3 = 1.00 A

SUMMARY
1.

2.

3.

The total force on a charge q moving with velocity v in the presence of
magnetic and electric fields B and E, respectively is called the Lorentz
force. It is given by the expression:
F = q (v × B + E)
The magnetic force q (v × B) is normal to v and work done by it is zero.
A straight conductor of length l and carrying a steady current I
experiences a force F in a uniform external magnetic field B,
F=Il×B
where|l| = l and the direction of l is given by the direction of the
current.
In a uniform magnetic field B, a charge q executes a circular orbit in
a plane normal to B. Its frequency of uniform circular motion is called
the cyclotron frequency and is given by:

νc =

4.

166

qB
2 πm

This frequency is independent of the particle’s speed and radius. This
fact is exploited in a machine, the cyclotron, which is used to
accelerate charged particles.
The Biot-Savart law asserts that the magnetic field dB due to an
element dl carrying a steady current I at a point P at a distance r from
the current element is:

dB =

µ 0 dl × r
I
4π
r3

EXAMPLE 4.13

RG rs
60 Ω × 0.02Ω
-% 0.02 Ω
=
RG + rs
(60 + 0.02)Ω

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

5.

To obtain the total field at P, we must integrate this vector expression
over the entire length of the conductor.
The magnitude of the magnetic field due to a circular coil of radius R
carrying a current I at an axial distance x from the centre is

B=

µ0 IR 2
2( x 2 + R 2 )3 / 2

At the center this reduces to

B=
6.

µ0 I
2R

Ampere’s Circuital Law: Let an open surface S be bounded by a loop
C. Then the Ampere’s law states that

Ñ∫ Bgdl = µ

0

I where I refers to

C

7.

the current passing through S. The sign of I is determined from the
right-hand rule. We have discussed a simplified form of this law. If B
is directed along the tangent to every point on the perimeter L of a
closed curve and is constant in magnitude along perimeter then,
BL = µ0 Ie
where Ie is the net current enclosed by the closed circuit.
The magnitude of the magnetic field at a distance R from a long,
straight wire carrying a current I is given by:

B=

8.

µ0 I
2ðR

The field lines are circles concentric with the wire.
The magnitude of the field B inside a long solenoid carrying a current
I is
B = µ0nI
where n is the number of turns per unit length. For a toroid one
obtains,

B=

µ0 NI
2 πr

where N is the total number of turns and r is the average radius.
9. Parallel currents attract and anti-parallel currents repel.
10. A planar loop carrying a current I, having N closely wound turns, and
an area A possesses a magnetic moment m where,
m=NIA
and the direction of m is given by the right-hand thumb rule : curl
the palm of your right hand along the loop with the fingers pointing
in the direction of the current. The thumb sticking out gives the
direction of m (and A)
When this loop is placed in a uniform magnetic field B, the force F on
it is: F = 0
And the torque on it is,
τ =m×B
In a moving coil galvanometer, this torque is balanced by a countertorque due to a spring, yielding
kφ = NI AB

167

Physics
where φ is the equilibrium deflection and k the torsion constant of
the spring.
11. An electron moving around the central nucleus has a magnetic moment
µl given by:

µl =

e
l
2m

where l is the magnitude of the angular momentum of the circulating
electron about the central nucleus. The smallest value of µl is called
the Bohr magneton µ B and it is µ B = 9.27×10–24 J/T
12. A moving coil galvanometer can be converted into a ammeter by
introducing a shunt resistance rs, of small value in parallel. It can be
converted into a voltmeter by introducing a resistance of a large value
in series.

Physical Quantity

Symbol

Nature

Dimensions

Units

Remarks

Permeability of free
space

µ0

Scalar

[MLT –2A–2]

T m A–1

4π × 10–7 T m A–1

Magnetic Field

B

Vector

[M T –2A–1]

T (telsa)

Vector

2

A m2 or J/T

Magnetic Moment

m

Torsion Constant

k

Scalar

[L A]
[M L2T –2]

N m rad–1

Appears in MCG

POINTS TO PONDER
1.

2.

3.

Electrostatic field lines originate at a positive charge and terminate at a
negative charge or fade at infinity. Magnetic field lines always form
closed loops.
The discussion in this Chapter holds only for steady currents which do
not vary with time.
When currents vary with time Newton’s third law is valid only if momentum
carried by the electromagnetic field is taken into account.
Recall the expression for the Lorentz force,
F = q (v × B + E)

4.

168

This velocity dependent force has occupied the attention of some of the
greatest scientific thinkers. If one switches to a frame with instantaneous
velocity v, the magnetic part of the force vanishes. The motion of the
charged particle is then explained by arguing that there exists an
appropriate electric field in the new frame. We shall not discuss the
details of this mechanism. However, we stress that the resolution of this
paradox implies that electricity and magnetism are linked phenomena
(electromagnetism) and that the Lorentz force expression does not imply
a universal preferred frame of reference in nature.
Ampere’s Circuital law is not independent of the Biot-Savart law. It
can be derived from the Biot-Savart law. Its relationship to the
Biot-Savart law is similar to the relationship between Gauss’s law and
Coulomb’s law.

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

EXERCISES
4.1

4.2
4.3

4.4

4.5

4.6

4.7

4.8

4.9

4.10

4.11

4.12

4.13

A circular coil of wire consisting of 100 turns, each of radius 8.0 cm
carries a current of 0.40 A. What is the magnitude of the magnetic
field B at the centre of the coil?
A long straight wire carries a current of 35 A. What is the magnitude
of the field B at a point 20 cm from the wire?
A long straight wire in the horizontal plane carries a current of 50 A
in north to south direction. Give the magnitude and direction of B
at a point 2.5 m east of the wire.
A horizontal overhead power line carries a current of 90 A in east to
west direction. What is the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
field due to the current 1.5 m below the line?
What is the magnitude of magnetic force per unit length on a wire
carrying a current of 8 A and making an angle of 30º with the
direction of a uniform magnetic field of 0.15 T ?
A 3.0 cm wire carrying a current of 10 A is placed inside a solenoid
perpendicular to its axis. The magnetic field inside the solenoid is
given to be 0.27 T. What is the magnetic force on the wire?
Two long and parallel straight wires A and B carrying currents of
8.0 A and 5.0 A in the same direction are separated by a distance of
4.0 cm. Estimate the force on a 10 cm section of wire A.
A closely wound solenoid 80 cm long has 5 layers of windings of 400
turns each. The diameter of the solenoid is 1.8 cm. If the current
carried is 8.0 A, estimate the magnitude of B inside the solenoid
near its centre.
A square coil of side 10 cm consists of 20 turns and carries a current
of 12 A. The coil is suspended vertically and the normal to the plane
of the coil makes an angle of 30º with the direction of a uniform
horizontal magnetic field of magnitude 0.80 T. What is the magnitude
of torque experienced by the coil?
Two moving coil meters, M1 and M2 have the following particulars:
R1 = 10 Ω, N1 = 30,
A1 = 3.6 × 10–3 m2, B1 = 0.25 T
R2 = 14 Ω, N2 = 42,
A2 = 1.8 × 10–3 m2, B2 = 0.50 T
(The spring constants are identical for the two meters).
Determine the ratio of (a) current sensitivity and (b) voltage
sensitivity of M2 and M1.
In a chamber, a uniform magnetic field of 6.5 G (1 G = 10 –4 T ) is
maintained. An electron is shot into the field with a speed of
4.8 × 106 m s–1 normal to the field. Explain why the path of the
electron is a circle. Determine the radius of the circular orbit.
(e = 1.6 × 10–19 C, me = 9.1×10–31 kg )
In Exercise 4.11 obtain the frequency of revolution of the electron in
its circular orbit. Does the answer depend on the speed of the
electron? Explain.
(a) A circular coil of 30 turns and radius 8.0 cm carrying a current
of 6.0 A is suspended vertically in a uniform horizontal magnetic
field of magnitude 1.0 T. The field lines make an angle of 60º

169

Physics
with the normal of the coil. Calculate the magnitude of the
counter torque that must be applied to prevent the coil from
turning.
(b) Would your answer change, if the circular coil in (a) were replaced
by a planar coil of some irregular shape that encloses the same
area? (All other particulars are also unaltered.)

ADDITIONAL EXERCISES
4.14

4.15

4.16

Two concentric circular coils X and Y of radii 16 cm and 10 cm,
respectively, lie in the same vertical plane containing the north to
south direction. Coil X has 20 turns and carries a current of 16 A;
coil Y has 25 turns and carries a current of 18 A. The sense of the
current in X is anticlockwise, and clockwise in Y, for an observer
looking at the coils facing west. Give the magnitude and direction of
the net magnetic field due to the coils at their centre.
A magnetic field of 100 G (1 G = 10–4 T) is required which is uniform
in a region of linear dimension about 10 cm and area of cross-section
about 10–3 m2. The maximum current-carrying capacity of a given
coil of wire is 15 A and the number of turns per unit length that can
be wound round a core is at most 1000 turns m–1. Suggest some
appropriate design particulars of a solenoid for the required purpose.
Assume the core is not ferromagnetic.
For a circular coil of radius R and N turns carrying current I, the
magnitude of the magnetic field at a point on its axis at a distance x
from its centre is given by,
B=

(

µ0 IR 2 N

2 x 2 + R2

)

3/2

(a) Show that this reduces to the familiar result for field at the
centre of the coil.
(b) Consider two parallel co-axial circular coils of equal radius R,
and number of turns N, carrying equal currents in the same
direction, and separated by a distance R. Show that the field on
the axis around the mid-point between the coils is uniform over
a distance that is small as compared to R, and is given by,

µ0 NI
, approximately.
R
[Such an arrangement to produce a nearly uniform magnetic
field over a small region is known as Helmholtz coils.]
A toroid has a core (non-ferromagnetic) of inner radius 25 cm and
outer radius 26 cm, around which 3500 turns of a wire are wound.
If the current in the wire is 11 A, what is the magnetic field
(a) outside the toroid, (b) inside the core of the toroid, and (c) in the
empty space surrounded by the toroid.
Answer the following questions:
(a) A magnetic field that varies in magnitude from point to point
but has a constant direction (east to west) is set up in a chamber.
A charged particle enters the chamber and travels undeflected
B = 0.72

4.17

4.18

170

Moving Charges and
Magnetism

4.19

4.20

4.21

4.22

4.23

4.24

along a straight path with constant speed. What can you say
about the initial velocity of the particle?
(b) A charged particle enters an environment of a strong and
non-uniform magnetic field varying from point to point both in
magnitude and direction, and comes out of it following a
complicated trajectory. Would its final speed equal the initial
speed if it suffered no collisions with the environment?
(c) An electron travelling west to east enters a chamber having a
uniform electrostatic field in north to south direction. Specify
the direction in which a uniform magnetic field should be set
up to prevent the electron from deflecting from its straight line
path.
An electron emitted by a heated cathode and accelerated through a
potential difference of 2.0 kV, enters a region with uniform magnetic
field of 0.15 T. Determine the trajectory of the electron if the field
(a) is transverse to its initial velocity, (b) makes an angle of 30º with
the initial velocity.
A magnetic field set up using Helmholtz coils (described in Exercise
4.16) is uniform in a small region and has a magnitude of 0.75 T. In
the same region, a uniform electrostatic field is maintained in a
direction normal to the common axis of the coils. A narrow beam of
(single species) charged particles all accelerated through 15 kV
enters this region in a direction perpendicular to both the axis of
the coils and the electrostatic field. If the beam remains undeflected
when the electrostatic field is 9.0 × 10–5 V m–1, make a simple guess
as to what the beam contains. Why is the answer not unique?
A straight horizontal conducting rod of length 0.45 m and mass
60 g is suspended by two vertical wires at its ends. A current of 5.0 A
is set up in the rod through the wires.
(a) What magnetic field should be set up normal to the conductor
in order that the tension in the wires is zero?
(b) What will be the total tension in the wires if the direction of
current is reversed keeping the magnetic field same as before?
(Ignore the mass of the wires.) g = 9.8 m s–2.
The wires which connect the battery of an automobile to its starting
motor carry a current of 300 A (for a short time). What is the force
per unit length between the wires if they are 70 cm long and 1.5 cm
apart? Is the force attractive or repulsive?
A uniform magnetic field of 1.5 T exists in a cylindrical region of
radius10.0 cm, its direction parallel to the axis along east to west. A
wire carrying current of 7.0 A in the north to south direction passes
through this region. What is the magnitude and direction of the
force on the wire if,
(a) the wire intersects the axis,
(b) the wire is turned from N-S to northeast-northwest direction,
(c) the wire in the N-S direction is lowered from the axis by a distance
of 6.0 cm?
A uniform magnetic field of 3000 G is established along the positive
z-direction. A rectangular loop of sides 10 cm and 5 cm carries a
current of 12 A. What is the torque on the loop in the different cases
shown in Fig. 4.28? What is the force on each case? Which case
corresponds to stable equilibrium?

171

Physics

FIGURE 4.28

4.25

4.26

4.27

4.28

172

A circular coil of 20 turns and radius 10 cm is placed in a uniform
magnetic field of 0.10 T normal to the plane of the coil. If the current
in the coil is 5.0 A, what is the
(a) total torque on the coil,
(b) total force on the coil,
(c) average force on each electron in the coil due to the magnetic
field?
(The coil is made of copper wire of cross-sectional area 10–5 m2, and
the free electron density in copper is given to be about
1029 m–3.)
A solenoid 60 cm long and of radius 4.0 cm has 3 layers of windings
of 300 turns each. A 2.0 cm long wire of mass 2.5 g lies inside the
solenoid (near its centre) normal to its axis; both the wire and the
axis of the solenoid are in the horizontal plane. The wire is connected
through two leads parallel to the axis of the solenoid to an external
battery which supplies a current of 6.0 A in the wire. What value of
current (with appropriate sense of circulation) in the windings of
the solenoid can support the weight of the wire? g = 9.8 m s–2.
A galvanometer coil has a resistance of 12 Ω and the metre shows
full scale deflection for a current of 3 mA. How will you convert the
metre into a voltmeter of range 0 to 18 V?
A galvanometer coil has a resistance of 15 Ω and the metre shows
full scale deflection for a current of 4 mA. How will you convert the
metre into an ammeter of range 0 to 6 A?

